The results of the present study extend these observations and show that the MetR protein also stimulates the in vitro expression of metH and that both the MetE and MetH proteins synthesized in vitro are enzymatically active .
Operons observed to be differentially expressed include not only all four of the transcripts , hmpA , ytfE , ygbA , and hcp - hcr , known or predicted to be NsrR - regulated ( 4 , 40 ) , but also other transcripts predicted to be regulated by nitrite or RNS generated from nitrite , for example , nitric oxide ( 11 ) .
In every case , MarA ( E89A ) bound as well as or more tightly ( i . e . , had a lower K D [ equilibrium dissociation constant ) than WT MarA . For several promoter marboxes this change was dramatic : the K D dropped from &gt; &gt; 150 to 50 for inaA , from 200 to 75 for nfsB , and from &gt; &gt; 150 nM to ~ 100 nM for both ybjC and yhbW . In spite of this , MarA ( E89A ) activation was greater than that of WT MarA for inaA , sodA , and ybjC ; it was comparable to that of WT MarA for micF and less than that of WT MarA for fumC , mdaB , nfsB , and ybhW ( Table 3 and Fig . 1 ) . We conclude that the WT glutamic acid of MarA at position 89 is an inhibitor of MarA binding to many marboxes . In an effort to understand why E89 is inhibitory , we examined the sequences of the 14 marboxes for which we have data ( Table 3 ) . We noticed that five haveaTatposition 12 and that the binding to none of these sequences is increased by the E89A substitution ( less than 1.7 - fold ) . In contrast , of the remaining nine sequences that do not have aTatthis position , the binding of E89A was increased for six of them by &gt; 2.5 - fold and for the seventh by 1.7 - fold ; only two do not show increased binding . Although the cocrystal structure of MarA with the marRAB marbox DNA ( with aTatposition 12 ) indicates no interaction between the two molecules at this position ( 36 ) , we considered the possibility that steric hindrance between the marbox DNA and MarA could limit activation by MarA when position 12 is not a T residue ( see the Discussion for a fuller treatment ) . To examine one facet of this possibility , namely , that the glutamic acid side chain of E89 sterically inhibits interaction with marbox DNAs lacking aTatposition 12 , we tested the effects of several amino acid substitutions at residue 89 on the fpr : : lacZ fusion and the mdtG : : lacZ fusion , the two fusions that showed the greatest effects of E89A on activation ( see above ) . Plasmids carrying WT MarA , the MarA variant MarA ( E89A ) ( with a nonpolar single methyl group side chain ) , MarA ( E89G ) ( with no side chain ) , MarA ( E89D ) ( with a side chain one methylene group shorter than glutamic acid ) , MarA ( E89V ) ( with the amino acid present at the corresponding position of SoxS and having a dimethyl methylene side chain , ) , WT SoxS , and SoxS ( V83E ) were introduced into these fusions and assayed for ß - galactosidase . Again ( Table 2 ) , activation of these promoters by SoxS was much greater than that by MarA ( Fig . 3 ) . Similarly , MarA ( E89A ) was considerably more active than WT MarA . In contrast , the E89D variant was less active than WT MarA for fpr and completely inactive ( indistinguishable from the control plasmid ) for mdtG . E89G was approximately twice as active as WT MarA for fpr and 4 - fold more active for mdtG although for both promoters it was considerably less active than E89A . The E89V variant was marginally more active than the WT for both promoters but substantially less so than E89A . SoxS ( V83E ) reduced the activation of these promoters relative to WT SoxS , but SoxS ( V83E ) was still more active than WT MarA . ( The activations shown here are greater than those apparent in Table 2 because the expression of the plasmids carrying MarA , SoxS , and their mutants is not entirely shut off by lacI q so that the increases expressed in Table 2 appear smaller . ) As outlined in the Discussion , these results , namely , ( i ) that variant E89D is virtually inactive , ( ii ) that E89G is very active although to a lesser extent than E89A , ( iii ) that E89V is only marginally more active than the WT , and ( iv ) that SoxS ( V83E ) has reduced activation although not to the low levels expressed by WT MarA , are consistent with the possibility that that the side chain of E89 sterically inhibits interaction with the DNA for marbox sequences lacking aTat position 12 . If , as outlined above and presented in greater detail in the Discussion , steric interference with the phosphate between positions 12 and 13 and the glutamic acid side chain at position 89 is responsible for the very poor activation of promoters such as fpr , then it would be predicted that binding of WT MarA to the fpr marbox would be enhanced if that phosphate were absent . We therefore compared the binding affinity of WT MarA to either a 36 - bp double - stranded DNA containing the marbox sequence of fpr or with dsDNA of the same sequence and length but prepared so that the phosphate linkage between positions 12 and 13 of the marbox was eliminated ( see Materials and Methods ) . Again ( Fig . 2 and Table 3 ) , MarA bound very poorly to the fpr marbox ( Fig . 4 ) . However , binding increased significantly when the fpr DNA lacked the phosphate group between positions 12 and 13 ( Fig . 4A and B ) . In contrast , SoxS bound more tightly to dsDNA than to the discontinuous DNA ( Fig . 4B ) . When the phosphate located 3 nt farther upstream ( between positions 9 and 10 ) was absent , no significant alteration in binding was observed ( Fig . 4 ) although a small increase was observed when the phosphate between positions 15 and 16 was absent . We conclude that the phosphate group between nt 12 and 13 of the consensus sequence inhibits the ability of MarA to bind . Activation and marbox binding by MarA ( Q91A ) . The only other MarA mutation found here to differ significantly from WT MarA in the activation of class I promoters was Q91A ( Table 2 ) . Of the seven class I promoters examined , MarA ( Q91A ) activated the acrAB , marRAB , and zwf promoters to similar extents as WT MarA but activated acnA , fpr , mdtG , and poxB to only 60 % or less of MarA WT levels ( Table 2 ; see also below ) . For the nine class II promoters , MarA ( Q91A ) significantly reduced the activation of fumC , inaA , micF , pqiA , and ybjC but had no significant effect on nfsB , mdaB , sodA , oryhbW . MarA - ( Q91 ) has been identified as forming van der Waals interactions with the methyl groups of the two thymidines that are complementary to the adenines at positions 17 and 18 of the consensus sequence ( 36 ) . Thus , it would be expected that the Q91A substitution might reduce activation of the seven class II promoters that have at least one A at position 17 or 18 but not the two promoters , nfsB and sodA , that have no A residues at these positions . Indeed , nfsB and sodA are among the promoters that Q91A activated to the same extent as WT MarA . Since Q91A reduced the expression of four of the seven class I promoters and four of the nine class II promoters , our results are inconsistent with the proposition that Q91 is principally required for interactions at class II promoters , as has been proposed for the analogous site ( Q85 ) in SoxS ( 16 ) . For the majority of these promoters , the gel mobility assay for binding of MarA to marboxes was insufficiently precise to determine whether there is a correlation between binding and activation by MarA ( Q91A ) relative to MarA ( Table 3 ) . Among the class I promoters that exhibited measurable binding to MarA , MarA ( Q91A ) showed no greater binding or activation for acrAB , a modest reduction in activation and binding for mdtG and zwf , and a reduction in binding but not in activation for marRAB . A modest reduction in binding with a small increase in activation was seen for the class II mdaB promoter . Although not observed in these experiments , a more detailed analysis of the binding of MarA ( Q91A ) to the micF marbox ( using protein without the His 6 tag ) showed a very small reduction in binding concomitant with the reduced ability of MarA ( Q91A ) to activate the class II micF promoter ( 13 ) . Thus , relative to MarA , there may be a correlation between activation and binding for Q91A at class I promoters , but none is obvious with regard to the class II promoters . Activation of superoxide resistance by MarA ( E89A ) . If the glutamic acid at position 89 of MarA is a major determinant in vivo of the reduced activity of MarA at many promoters where SoxS is more active , we would expect cells carrying MarA ( E89A ) to be more resistant to superoxides than cells carrying WT MarA . This was tested with gradient plate assays of sensitivity to two superoxide - generating compounds , phenazine methosulfate ( PMS ) and menadione ( Table 4 ) . Cells constitutively expressing MarA ( E89A ) were more resistant than WT MarA to PMS ( 1.7 - fold ) and , to a lesser extent , to menadione ( 1.3 - fold ) . Comparable MICs with SoxS for PMS were 1.6 - fold and for menadione 2.0 - fold . Clearly , MarA ( E89A ) activates superoxide resistance to a greater extent than WT MarA . Curiously , the Q91A substitution had no effect on resistance to the superoxide generator PMS ( MIC of 35 µM for both the Q91A mutant and the WT MarA ) but lowered resistance to the superoxide generator menadione ( MIC of 0.9 mM for the Q91A mutant and 1.8 mM for the WT ) . DISCUSSION . The MarA - SoxS - Rob regulon of E . coli consists of a variety of genes that enable cells to adapt to multiple stresses . It contains genes that render the cell multidrug and organicsolvent resistant ( acrAB , tolC , and micF ) and that defend against superoxide stress ( e . g . , acnA , fpr , fumC , nfsA , sodA , and zwf ) ( 1 , 2 , 5 , 26 , 31 , 33 ) . Not surprisingly , there are quantitative differences in the extents of activation of particular promoters by the paralogous activators so that the phenotypic outcomes depend on which activator is upregulated ( 2 , 26 , 34 , 43 ) . E89 inhibition . We have shown here that the MarA glutamic acid residue E89 is responsible for decreasing the binding of WT MarA relative to SoxS for the class I marbox promoters , acnA , mdtG , fpr , and zwf , thereby decreasing the relative activation of these promoters and hence the resistance engendered to superoxides by MarA . We think the following may explain these results . A detail of the MarA structure ( Fig . 5 ) shows that E89 is oriented in the cocrystal with its acidic groups exposed to the solvent away from the DNA backbone . In so doing , methyl hydrogens on the ß - and - carbons are positioned restrictively close to an oxygen of the phosphate group between bases T12 and G13 of the marRAB marbox . Even this orientation of E89 is only possible as the result of a small “ clash ” ( as predicted by the MolProbity program [ http : / / molprobity . biochem . duke . edu / ] ) between E89 and S90 that permits the rotation of E89 into the MarA core and away from the DNA backbone .
Molecular Microbiology ( 2009 ) 74 ( 6 ) , 1513 – 1526 doi : 10.1111 / j . 1365 - 2958.2009.06950 . x First published online 19 November 2009 Competitive activation of the Escherichia coli argO gene coding for an arginine exporter by the transcriptional regulators Lrp and ArgPmmi _ 6950 1513 .. 1526 Eveline Peeters , Phu Nguyen Le Minh , Maria Foulquié - Moreno and Daniel Charlier * Erfelijkheidsleer en Microbiologie , Vrije Universiteit Brussel ( VUB ) , Pleinlaan 2 , B - 1050 Brussels , Belgium .
It appears that binding of the metJ gene product may prevent binding of RNA polymerase to the metB and Jl promoters and , under strongly repressing conditions , may also decrease the binding to the J2 promoter .
Both inaA and marRAB are known Rob - regulated genes ( 5 , 21 ) .
This shows that whereas both NagC and ChbR appear to act as repressors for the chbB operon in the absence of the inducing sugar chitobiose , ChbR is necessary for induction and so behaves as a dual - function repressor – activator .
Identification of the DNAbinding domain of the OmpR protein required for transcriptional activation of the ompF and ompC genes of Escherichia coli by in vivo DNA footprinting .
MelR is a member of the AraC - XylS family of bacterial gene regulatory proteins ( 6 ) and our previous studies have shown that MelR , together with the cyclic AMP receptor protein , CRP , regulates expression of the melAB operon that encodes products essential for melibiose metabolism ( 7 ) .
For example , the nitrate reductase genes narGHJI are regulated exclusively by NarL and are not responsive to NarP as observed here for cydD , while nitrate induction of the fdnGHI operon is regulated predominantly by NarL but is also responsive in part to NarP ( 33 , 39 ) .
Under identical experimental conditions as for argO , the regulatory regions of the other ArgP - regulated genes ( asd , dapB , dapD , gdhA , lysA , lysC , and lysP ) were also bound by ArgP , with apparent K d s ranging from 55 nM to 170 nM ; in all these cases ( unlike the situation with argO ) , the addition of Lys was associated with an increase in the apparent K d , indicating that ArgP binding in these instances is Lys sensitive .
MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter in each of the new constructs was measured as above and the results are illustrated in Figure 6B .
Given that the activation by full - length , chromosomally expressed RhaS at rhaBAD is approximately 33 - fold higher than that of chromosomally expressed RhaR at rhaSR , comparable efficiencies of activation by the CTDs to their full - length counterparts would have resulted in His 6 - RhaR - CTD activating rhaSR by approximately 30 - fold .
This observation not only allows us to understand how a modest mutation in O NC2 can affect fimB expression whereas the D3 mutation does not , but it also supports our prior assertion that NanR activates fimB expression without NagC ( Sohanpal et al . , 2004 ) .
These latter results , together with the experiments described here showing that MetJ binds to this region of DNA , strongly suggest that the - 8 to + 27 region is involved in metE repression .
Note that in a control experiment , the activity of the MBP - NarL protein was confirmed by its ability to activate transcription of the NarL - dependent fdnG promoter in vitro ( data not shown ) .
Thus , it appears that NarL and NarP adopt overlapping mechanisms to inhibit ydhY – T expression .
In relation to pacsP1 , the DNA site for Fis is centred at position – 61 , and its distal nature suggests that pacsP1 repression operates via a different mechanism .
Our results indicate that yggA encodes an ArgP - regulated Arg exporter in E . coli .
Organization and regulation of the D - xylose operons in Escherichia coli K - 12 : XylR acts as a transcriptional activator .
Some of these operons are regulated by the NarL protein alone , such as the narG and frdA operons , whereas expression of the nirB ( encoding NADH - dependent nitrite reductase ) , nrfA and fdnG operons is controlled by both the NarL and NarP proteins .
The ArgP protein enhances the expression of the argK gene To test the biological activity of the ArgP protein on the arginine transport system , the amounts of mRNA synthesized by a 502 bp KpnI - EcoRV DNA fragment containing the N terminus and the control region of the argK gene was investigated .
However , the inactivation of DcuS ( IMW553 ) led to a decrease of citC - lacZ expression by a factor of 1.5 , which could be due to interaction between CitA and DcuS .
RESULTS Oligomerization of DnaA Protein to the dnaA Promoter — Sequence - specific DNA binding of DnaA protein to the dnaA promoter region ( Fig . 1 ) was studied in detail using a combined gel - shift and chemical footprinting assay to determine the extent of DNA binding to the region flanking the consensus DNA - binding site , the DnaA box .
An alternative explanation is that repression occurs by the ' roadblock ' mechanism described for PurR repression of the purB promoter ( He and Zalkin , 1992 ) .
The experiments in Fig . 2a – c suggest that the binding of Rob to the robboxes of the fumC , micF , and inaA promoters occludes the binding of 70 R4 to the 35 hexamer of these class II promoters , as is also the case during SoxS - dependent activation of the fumC and micF promoters .
ß - Galactosidase activity Promoter Mutated site minus NO 3 plus NO 3 Fold induction ogt100 93 + 1 439 + 12 4.7 ogt102 NarL I 92 + 5 107 + 6 1.2 ogt104 NarL II 56 + 2 87 + 3 1.6 the yeaR promoter is repressed by the binding of NsrR to a target that overlaps the 10 hexamer element ( Figure 1A ) [ 12,31,32 ] .
Besides , MarA activates fumC , fpr , nfo and other genes possibly involved in response to the oxidative stress .
Nitrate - and nitrite - mediated expression of the hcp is dependent on NarL and NarP Sequence analysis of the hcp regulatory region suggested that it contains a binding site for FNR and also binding sites for nitrite - and nitrate - activated regulators , NarL and NarP ( Figure 1 ) .
These genes for the GntI system have been extensively characterized and shown to be regulated negatively by GntR and positively by the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein ( CRP ) complex [ Tong et al . , 1996 ; Izu et al . , 1997a , b ; Porco et al . , 1997 ; Peekhaus and Conway , 1998 ] .
Therefore , arafl is essential for both repression and activation and acts as a switch to allow both the repressor and the activator forms of the AraC protein to control the araBAD promoter .
As hmpA and ytfE encode a nitric oxide reductase and a mechanism to repair iron - sulfur centers damaged by nitric oxide , the demonstration that hcp - hcr , hmpA , and ytfE are the three transcripts most tightly regulated by NsrR highlights the possibility that the hybrid cluster protein , HCP , might also be part of a defense mechanism against reactive nitrogen stress .
As shown in Fig . 2 , induction of ArgP synthesis was soon followed by a sharp stimulation of dapBlacZ transcription .
3901 - 3905 , June 1987 Microbiology The narL gene product activates the nitrate reductase operon and represses the fumarate reductase and trimethylamine N - oxide reductase operons in Escherichia coli ( frd gene / tor gene / regulation ) S .
Thus the D3 region is not apparently required for NanR to activate fimB expression in the wildtype background , and it could contain specific sequences that inhibit this .
Another example is the NarL / NarP - and FNR - stimulated expression of nirB and nrf genes , which are repressed by Fis and IHF ( Browning et al . , 2002 ) .
These results show that constitutive and inducible expression of the chromosomal MarA was able to upregulate nfnB expression in contrast with the lack of activation mediated by constitutive expression of the chromosomal SoxS and Rob proteins .
Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : interactions of MelR with its DNA target site and with domain 4 of the RNA polymerase sigma subunit .
Coincidence of the sites for SoxS - and Rob - mediated activation of zwf transcription in vitro .
Genes differentially regulated in strains carrying pGIT1 and pGIT8 a Transcript expression ratio in c : Coregulation by d : Gene Product pGIT8 pGIT8 2 2 with NO 2 vs pGIT1 2 vs pGIT8 pGIT8 2 vs pGIT1 with NO 2 Operon structure FNR NarL NarP NsrR site e Reference NsrR repressed hcr NADH oxidoreductase 12.20 4.47 13.09 hcp - hcr A f , g A g 6 wrt mapped TSS hcp Hybrid cluster protein 15.65 5.28 9.93 yccM Predicted 4Fe - 4S membrane protein 4.89 3.19 4.18 yccM A f 69 wrt predicted TSS uspF Nucleotide binding protein 2.09 1.63 1.78 uspF yeaR Hypothetical protein 2.57 3.57 3.12 yeaR - yoaG R A A 20 wrt predicted TSS A f , g R g A g 30 wrt mapped TSS ccmG Cytochrome c biogenesis system 2.75 2.17 2.64 napFDAGHBCccmABCDEFGH ccmF Cytochrome c biogenesis system 2.08 1.73 2.34 napB Periplasmic nitrate reductase 2.07 3.49 3.75 napH Periplasmic nitrate reductase 2.13 3.39 3.86 napD Periplasmic nitrate reductase 2.02 3.49 2.80 napF Periplasmic nitrate reductase 2.41 3.99 3.00 hmpA b Flavohemoglobin 13.07 8.50 14.44 hmpA R f , g A 1 wrt mapped TSS ygbA b Hypothetical protein 4.58 3.20 3.86 ygbA R f 7 wrt mapped TSS nrfA Periplasmic nitrite reductase 5.28 7.37 6.66 nrfABCDEFG A f , g R g A g 63 wrt mapped TSS nrfB Periplasmic nitrite reductase 3.54 4.31 4.67 nrfC Periplasmic nitrite reductase 4.51 5.30 6.19 nrfD Periplasmic nitrite reductase 3.68 3.98 3.99 nrfE Periplasmic nitrite reductase 4.72 5.15 6.44 nrfF Periplasmic nitrite reductase 2.65 3.29 2.47 ytfE b RNS - induced conserved protein 31.91 7.84 33.18 ytfE R g A 12 wrt mapped TSS 17 13 12 6 25 , 26 NsrR activated insB _ 1 IS1 protein InsB 0.40 1.29 0.60 yafE Predicted S - adenosylmethioninedependent 0.36 0.36 0.35 yafDE methyltransferase yafU Predicted inner membrane protein 0.23 0.44 0.16 yafU ykfJ Hypothetical protein 0.43 0.52 0.68 ykfJ [ prfH ] mmuP Predicted ABC transporter 0.37 0.57 0.27 mmuPM A insB _ 2 IS1 protein InsB 0.41 1.46 0.63 yagA Hypothetical protein 0.23 0.56 0.18 yagA insB _ 3 IS1 protein InsB 0.40 1.07 0.59 ykgF Predicted amino acid dehydrogenase 0.40 0.42 0.49 ykgEFG R A betB Betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase 0.47 0.70 0.54 betIBA R A cyoE Cytochrome bo terminal oxidase 0.44 0.94 0.47 cyoABCDE R f A cyoC Cytochrome bo terminal oxidase 0.36 0.96 0.51 cyoB Cytochrome bo terminal oxidase 0.29 0.67 0.38 cyoA Cytochrome bo terminal oxidase 0.26 0.79 0.35 ompF Outer membrane porin 0.43 0.63 0.40 ompF insB _ 4 IS1 protein InsB 0.35 1.18 0.54 dadA D - Amino acid dehydrogenase 0.49 0.76 0.49 dadAX ydbC Putative oxidoreductase 0.03 0.03 0.01 ydbC insB _ 5 IS1 protein InsB 0.40 1.25 0.61 ygeF Hypothetical protein 0.43 0.94 0.49 ygeF insB _ 6 IS1 protein InsB 0.38 1.30 0.61 yiiL L - Rhamnose mutarotase 0.17 0.23 0.16 rhaBAD - yiiL A yjbB Putative - helix protein 0.35 0.42 0.23 yjbB A yjiV Hypothetical protein 0.30 0.26 0.45 yjiU a This table lists genes that display at least a twofold difference in transcript abundance between anaerobically grown cultures of E . coli strain MG1655 harboring pGIT1 , a multicopy plasmid with a copy of the ytfE promoter to which NsrR binds , and pGIT8 , the same plasmid with a mutation which abolishes NsrR binding .
Orientation of MelR bound at site R Wade et al . ( 17 ) showed that MelR - binding site R is essential for MelR - dependent repression of the melR A MelR RNA - 1 B TB23 TB23 TB22 TB22 MelR + + % Relative Intensity 150 100 50 0 TB23 MelR + MelR TB22 Figure 2 .
Similar to the results of metE expression , MetR greatly stimulates the synthesis of MetH using plasmid pQN1011 as template ( lane 5 vs . lane 7 ) .
Separate contributions of UhpA and CAP to activation of transcription of the uhpT promoter of Escherichia coli .
It has been shown that the three proteins ChbR , CRP and NagC regulate the expression of the chb operon .
For these reasons , we believe that NarL and NarP activate expression at pnrfA by a similar mechanism to that at pnirB , i . e . by counteracting the effects of repressive factors .
Instead , only R603A ( 73 % ) of 70 reduced Rob - dependent activation of the micF promoter .
Summary Expression from the Escherichia coli nrfA promoter ( pnrfA ) is activated by both the FNR protein ( an anaerobically triggered transcription activator ) and the NarL or NarP proteins ( transcription activators triggered by nitrite and nitrate ) .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
This unusual spacing in relation to the RNA polymerase binding site may reflect a distinct mechanism by which Fnr ( and NarP ) activates aeg - 46.5 operon expression .
One obvious difference between the synthetic promoter and the napF operon promoter is that transcription from the latter is also activated by the NarP protein bound to a site centered at position 44.5 .
NarL - mediated repression of the frdA promoter is achieved by NarL binding over a large region centred near the transcription start site and including the FNR site ( Li et al . , 1994 ) .
The microarray data for the other promoters that are apparently activated by NsrR must be evaluated cautiously , however , because few of these transcripts encode proteins known or suspected to be involved in the response to RNS , and most of the differences were much smaller ( typically two - to threefold apparent activation ) than the 30 - fold repression of ytfE , the 14 - fold repression of hmpA , and the up - to - 15 - fold repression of hcp .
As at the yeaR promoter , nitrate - dependent induction can be repressed by Fis that binds to a single site overlapping the upstream DNA site for NarL .
This was indeed suggested by Détiollaz et al . ( 49 ) on the basis that IHF sites replacing CAP sites allowed activation of the malT promoter , albeit less than with CAP .
Additional effects on the expression of many genes may occur through Robmediated activation of other regulatory proteins ( MarA , AslB , and YbaO ) .
It accepts a methyl group from methylphosphotriesters and then acts as a transcriptional activator of the ada operon AdiY Escherichia coli SP : P33234 Transcriptional activator of the adiA gene for 253 32 , 237 biodegradative acid - induced arginine decarboxylase AfrR Escherichia coli TE : Q07681 Probable transcriptional activator of the 272 258 afrABRS operon for expression of AF / R1 fimbria in E . coli RDEC - 1 , a rabbit pathogen AggR Escherichia coli SP : P43464 Transcriptional activator of the aggA gene for 265 183 aggregative adherence fimbria I ( AAF / I ) expression in enteroaggregative E . coli strains AppY Escherichia coli SP : P05052 Transcriptional activator of the cyxAB , hyaAB - 243 12 , 131 CDEF and appA operons during the deceleration phase of growth AraC Citrobacter freundii SP : P11765 Regulator of several operons involved in the 281 30 transport and catabolism of L - arabinose ( similar to E . coli AraC ) AraC Escherichia coli SP : P03021 Activator of the expression of the araBAD , 292 174 , 238 , 248 , 266 araFGH and araE operons , which are involved in the transport and catabolism of L - arabinose .
The NarL and NarP proteins are each able to activate expression of the nirB and nrfA operons by interaction with common DNA - binding sites .
The NarL / NarP protein binding sites required for activation of the nirB and nrfA operons are located further upstream ( 69.5 and 74.5 , respectively ) than that of the aeg - 46.5 operon ( 44.5 ) .
Coeffectors of ArgP in yggA regulation .
The identification of NagC as an activator of fimB expression indicated that the expression of the recombinase would be inhibited by GlcNAc .
In conclusion , MelR and CRP bind to the melAB promoter co - operatively to adjacent sites in order to activate transcription in a co - dependent manner .
Like MalE - SoxS , MarA ( i ) activated the transcription of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA ; ( ii ) required a 21 - bp " soxbox " sequence to activate zwf transcription ; and ( iii ) was " ambidextrous , " i . e . , required the C - terminal domain of the a subunit of RNA polymerase for activation of zwf but not fumC or micF .
Positive and negative transcriptional regulation of the Escherichia coli gluconate regulon gene gntT by GntR and the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein complex .
They demonstrated that acnA has two promoters , P1 and P2 , the latter being regulated by SoxS , FNR , CRP and ArcA .
This domain alone could activate transcription of araBAD up to 15 % as well as full - length AraC when alone or to the same level as fulllength AraC when fused to an unrelated dimerization domain ( 7 , 36 ) .
Other results in Fig . 2A show that FNR - dependent activation of the nrf promoter is repressed by Fis or IHF proteins .
As the DNA binding site for FNR overlaps the acsP1 - 35 element , it is easy to understand how FNR represses acsP1 at the same time as it activates the nrf promoter .
The known SoxS - activated genes are sodA ( encoding Mnsuperoxide dismutase ) , fpr ( NADPH - ferredoxin oxidoreductase ) , micF ( antisense RNA , repressor of OmpF translation ) , ribA ( cyclic GMP hydrolase ) , inaA ( unknown function ) , fldA and fldB ( flavodoxins A and B ) , nfo ( endonuclease IV ) , marRAB ( multiple - antibiotic - resistance operon ) , nfsA ( also called mdaA , a nitroreductase ) , zwf ( glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase ) , fur ( an iron - binding repressor of iron uptake ) , fumC ( fumarase C ) , acnA ( aconitase ) , tolC ( outer membrane protein ) , acrAB ( drug efflux pump ) , and rimK ( a modifier of ribosomal protein S6 ) .
We found that Rob ( i ) activates the transcription of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA , ( ii ) requires a 21 - bp soxbox - marbox - robbox sequence to activate zwf transcription , ( iii ) protects the soxbox / marbox / robbox from attack by DNase I , ( iv ) is ambidextrous , i . e . , requires the C - terminal domain of the a subunit of RNA polymerase for activation of zwf but not fumC or micF , ( v ) bends zwf and fumC DNA , and ( vi ) binds zwf and fumC DNA as a monomer .
These indicate that DnaA and IciA proteins independently bind to their respective binding sites on the dnaA # 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 19 , 389 – 396392 Y .
Schematic representation of regulation of araBAD and araC promoters by CAP , P1 , and P2 . negative control of Pc by P1 and P2 .
The binding of phospho - NarL / NarP displaces IHF from the IHF I site and remodels the architecture of the nir promoter , enabling FNRdependent transcription activation .
Thus , we have investigated the involvement of aCTD in CRP - dependent activation at the melAB promoter by using a preparation of E . coli RNAP , reconstituted with truncated a subunits that lack the C - terminal 73 residues .
These findings indicate that , whereas the binding of wild - type CRP to site 1 is not sufficient to activate transcription from the fucPIK promoter , binding of CRP K52N is sufficient , at least for the IS5 - disrupted promoter .
Recently , we demonstrated that activation of in vitro zwf transcription by MalE - SoxS ( 18 ) , and by MarA as well ( 19 ) , requires this same DNA binding element and that this soxbox / marbox can bring in vitro gnd transcription under control of these two activators ( 18 , 19 ) .
This work is a first step in studying the mechanism ( s ) by which AraC regulates transcription at the araE promoter , p E , and at p FGH .
Together with a bioinformatic analysis of other Enterobacteriaceae species , these data identify a conserved AraC regulon that includes 7 previously described AraC - regulated genes ( araB , araA , araD , araE , araF , araG , and araH ) as well as three novel targets identified in this work ( ytfQ , araT , and araU ) .
These observations indicate that the region that is essential for normal Fnr - dependent induction of aeg - 46.5 operon expression is located downstream of position 85 .
The mechanism of transcriptional activation of micF and ompC by OmpR as well as a role of IHF in this activation need to be better understood .
At the same time , it is noteworthy that two of the genes that are most prominently regulated by ArgP , argO and lysP , are both also regulated by the leucineresponsive general transcriptional regulator Lrp ( 37 , 41 ) .
Integration of three signals at the Escherichia coli nrf promoter : a role for Fis protein in catabolite repression .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
The Rob homologs MarA and SoxS can activate transcription of a broad range of genes in vivo ( reviewed in references 2 and 14 ) , including sodA , fumC , micF , zwf , and inaA , suggesting broadly overlapping activities of these three regulators .
( 2001 ) Systematic mutagenesis of the DNA binding sites for SoxS in the zwf and fpr promoters of Escherichia coli : identifying nucleotides required for DNA binding and transcription activation .
It is interesting to compare the characteristics of NagCmediated repression of nag degradative genes with the NagC - mediated activation of the glm genes .
Although a similar arrangement of sites around the transcription initiation regions of other genes of the gal regulon might have suggested that they all are regulated by a similar mechanism to galE ( Weickert and Adhya , 1993a , b ; Semsey et al . , 2007 ) , the results presented in this paper demonstrate that repression of the galP gene , is mediated by a distinctly different nucleoprotein complex involving NagC as well as GalR and GalS and including at least 280 bp of DNA .
These data clearly indicate that the hcp promoter is activated by FNR and repressed by NsrR .
We also extended the previous studies by Bhende and Egan ( 4 ) of RhaS - mediated transcription activation at rhaBAD .
Transcriptional repression of the dnaA gene of Escherichia coli by DnaA protein .
We identified eight genes and confirmed that seven are transcriptionally activated by normal expression of Rob from the chromosomal rob gene ( inaA , marR , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , and ybiS ) .
As the chb transcript accumulates , ChiX pairing with the intercistronic chbBC mRNA elicits the degradation of the sRNA resulting in the progressive relief of chiP repression ( Figueroa - Bossi et al . , 2009 ; Overgaard et al . , 2009 ) .
After the emergence of nitrate respiration , the narL product probably first evolved as a specific activator protein for the narC operon and subsequently broadened its role to include repression .
Thus , the dmsA promoter is repressed by NarL binding to multiple sites spread across 80 bp covering the entire promoter ( 1 , 5 ) .
One site , designated the IciA I site , was located upstream IciA protein binds two sites in the dnaA promoter region DNase I - protection experiments were performed to identify binding sites of the IciA protein in the dnaA promoter region ( Fig . 3 ) .
We conclude that RhaR positively regulates transcription from the promoters pl , p2 and p3 , and that RhaS may regulate p1 and p3 weakly .
The shaded boxes denote 22 bp DNA sites for CRP : one site centered at position 241.5 is responsible for the activation of the melR promoter , while the other , centered at position 2155.5 is involved in activation of the melAB promoter .
For example , the galETK operon is regulated by three factors GalR , CAP and the nucleoid - associated protein HU .
Therefore , the induction of dcuB depends on functional DcuS / DcuR .
Research Article J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2003 ; 6 : 41 – 56 DOI : 10.1159 / 000073407 Dual Control by Regulators , GntH and GntR , of the GntII Genes for Gluconate Metabolism in Escherichia coli Ryouichi Tsunedomi Hanae Izu Takuya Kawai Mamoru Yamada Department of Biological Chemistry , Faculty of Agriculture , Yamaguchi University , Yamaguchi , Japan Key Words Gluconate metabolism W Gntll W gntR W gntH W Divergent promoter W Expressional regulation Abstract Escherichia coli possesses two systems , GntI and GntII , for gluconate uptake and catabolism , whose genes are regulated by GntR as a repressor and GntH as an activator , respectively .
Plasmids overproducing either the NagC protein or the Mlc protein repress the expression of manX , but the effect of the Mlc protein is stronger .
The binding of NarL or NarP to the nir promoter displaces IHF and overrides the repression of FNR - dependent activation by IHF and Fis ( Browning et al . , 2004 ) .
In vitro , ArgP binds the lysP regulatory region with a K d of around 55 nM and the binding affinity is diminished upon the addition of Lys ( to a K d of 140 nM ) , suggesting that Lys represses lysP in vivo by engendering the loss of ArgP binding to the lysP operator region .
Effects of - CTD alanine substitution mutants on rhaSR activation .
For the nirBDC and nrfABCDEFG operons , Fnr protein , bound near position 41.5 , activates transcription maximally only when phospho - NarL or - NarP protein is bound further upstream to block inhibition by other proteins ( 2 , 8 , 59 ) .
Expression of both nagE and nagB was shown to be stimulated by CAP in viva , although nagE was much more dependent than nagB ( Plumbridge , 1990 ) .
These results indicated that ArgP is responsible for the transcriptional activation of lysP in the absence of lysine .
In our previous study ( 17 ) , we reported that repression of the melR promoter by MelR was unaffected by point mutations in either site 1 or site 1 0 .
PhoB - dependent regulation of P4 .
NarL , activated in the presence of nitrate , modulates the pattern of anaerobic gene expression by inducing further the Fnr - dependent expression of formate dehydrogenase N ( Berg and Stewart , 1990 ) and nitrate reductase ( Stewart , 1982 ; Stewart and Parales , 1988 ) and by repressing the expression of the gene which encodes the fermentative enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase { Kalman and Gunsalus , 1988 ) as well as reductases for alternative electron acceptors , such as dimethylsulphoxide and fumarate ( luchi and Lin , 1987 ; Cotter and Gunsalus , 1989 ) , whose reductions are characterized by tower oxidation - reduction potentials .
( 2000 ) FNR dependent activation of the class II dmsA and narG promoters of Escherichia coli requires FNR - activating regions 1 and 3 .
Expression of acrZ is coregulated with acrAB and tolC by the MarA , Rob , and SoxS transcription factors .
Moreover , a common inverted repeat sequence coincided with the defined here NsrR recognition motif was shown to be involved in NsrR - mediated repression of the ytfE gene .
ArgP - mediated regulation of argO transcription was then tested in a defined in vitro run - off transcription system using 70 - bearing RNAP holoenzyme and a linear DNA template that encompasses the argO region from 293 to + 109 ( Fig . 1C ) .
At the nirB promoter ( pnirB ) , it has been shown that IHF and Fis drive the promoter DNA into an inhibitory architecture , which represses FNR - dependent transcription .
An isorepressor , GalS , has also been identified as © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing LtdNagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 147 Fig . 1 .
Deletion of crp ( Table 5 ) resulted in a level of expression from each fusion that was similar to the expression from ( rhaS - lacZ ) 90 in the crp strain background , supporting our hypothesis that full rhaSR activation requires CRP .
( 2007 ) ArgR - dependent repression of arginine and histidine transport genes in Escherichia coli K - 12 .
To measure MelR - dependent repression of melR promoter activity , the pRW50 derivatives carrying the TB20 , TB22 , TB23 or TB10 fragments were transformed into WAM1321 melR lac cells containing either pJW15 , encoding melR , or empty control vector , pJWmelR and b - galactosidase activities were measured .
This suggests that Fnr and NarP may act synergistically to activate napF operon expression .
Gene LU106 - pFM45 / LU106 - pFM20 ( average + S . D . ) metA 1.6 + 0.1 metB 1.5 + 0.2 metC 1.3 + 0.04 metE 5.7 + 0.3 metF 1.5 + 0.1 metG 1.2 + 0.2 metH 1.6 + 0.1 metJ 7.0 + 0.1 metK 1.6 + 0.1 metL 1.3 + 0.1 metR 1.3 + 0.1 Figure 3 RT – PCR analysis of met transcripts M indicates marker lanes containing a 100 bp ladder ; c : lanes where aliquots have been loaded with control assays in which RT was omitted ; R : a sample from LU106 ( pFM20 ) cells in which the met genes are repressed ; D : a sample from LU106 ( pFM26 ) cells in which there is no functional metJ gene and consequently expression of met genes is de - repressed .
Negative regulation of aeg - 46.5 operon expression by the NarL protein In addition to its function as a transcriptional activator , the NarL protein negatively regulates expression of the frdA , dmsA and nrfA operons in response to nitrate availability .
Lysine represses transcription of the Escherichia coli dapB gene by preventing its activation by the ArgP activator .
This may mean that RhaR stimulates transcription from the psr promoter by interacting directly with RNA polymerase .
Our analysis revealed that inaA , marRAB , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , and ybiS were transcriptionally activated by constitutive levels of Rob , while galT expression was repressed .
NarL - phosphate must bind to multiple upstream sites to activate transcription from the narG promoter of Escherichia coli .
However , narG and frdA operon expression is regulated by the NarL protein alone ( Rabin &amp; Stewart , 1993 ) , suggesting that the NarL binding sites in these control regions are not efficiently recognized by the NarP protein .
The negative regulation by GntH may allow the GntI gene expression to cease after the maximum expression level and its positive regulation causes induction of the GntII genes .
Furthermore , as NagC binding to O NC1 prevents CRP - dependent activation of nanC ( Condemine et al . , 2005 ) , this study should enhance our understanding of the regulation of this gene as well .
The Escherichia coli Ada protein can interact with two distinct determinants in the 70 subunit of RNA polymerase according to promoter architecture : identification of the target of Ada activation at the alkA promoter .
Also , DnaA protein functions as a transcriptional repressor for the expression of other genes including rpoH ( 18 ) , mioC ( 19 ) , the guaBA operon ( 20 ) , and uvrB ( 21 ) , while the expression of the nrd gene appeared to be enhanced by DnaA protein ( 22 ) .
Transposon mutagenesis experiments aimed at defining the Rob regulon revealed eight Rob - regulated targets , namely inaA , marRAB , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , ybiS , and galT ( 10 ) , some of which are also known members of the mar and sox regulons ( 11 ) .
Results illustrated in Figure 5B show that MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter is unaffected when CRP binding at this target is prevented .
Northern blotting analysis indicated that RbsR represses the purHD operon for de novo synthesis of purine nucleotide but activates the add and udk genes involved in the salvage pathway of purine nucleotide synthesis .
Positive and negative transcriptional regulation of the Escherichia coli gluconate regulon gene gntT by GntR and the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein complex .
NarL , FNR and Fis can bind to pnir together , but NarL interferes with the binding of IHF To investigate the mechanism by which NarL counteracts IHF - and Fis - mediated repression at pnir , we used gel retardation assays and DNase I footprinting to examine the binding of NarL , FNR , Fis and IHF .
The micF gene encodes a non - translated 93 nt antisense RNA that binds its target ompF mRNA and regulates ompF expression by inhibiting translation and inducing degradation of the message .
The Ada protein has two activation domains , one of which is an AraC / XylS family domain which is required to activate transcription of the alkA operon ( 33 ) .
In the first point , such a case has been reported in the galETK ( M ) operon concerning galactose utilization , which is regulated by GalR and GalS [ Weickert and Adhya , 1993a b ] , but its molecular mechanism is clearly different from that of the GntII gene regulation .
Although a 26 - bp near - perfect palindromic region from 102 to 77 exists upstream of argO ( see Fig . 1A ) , neither its deletion ( designated 1 ) nor that of an overlapping 1260 GENES &amp; DEVELOPMENT upstream region from 115 to 90 ( designated 2 ) led to any significant loss of either ArgP binding to argO in vitro ( Fig . 2B ) or to Arg - and Lys - modulated transcriptional regulation in vivo ( Fig . 1B , top panel ) .
Summary Expression of the narK gene of Escherichia coli , like the narGHJI operon , is positively regulated by two frans - acting factors : Fnr , which is activated by anaerobic conditions , and NarL , which is activated by the presence of nitrate .
The metR gene , which activates metE and metH , was only slightly derepressed .
Here , we found that Lrp binds to several sites at the lysP control region and is able to potentiate the transcriptional activation mediated by ArgP when lysine becomes limiting .
As already mentioned , a potential ArgP - binding site , ATG AAGGTGTCTTAT , is centered at position 59 in the lysP promoter / control region ( Fig . 2 ) .
The mefA operator had the highest apparent affinity in these assays , where the repression complex would be expected to contain at least four MetJ dimers , compared with two in the minimal complexes formed on the synthetic sites .
NsrR : sixth protein to regulate transcription factor at P nrfA .
MelR is essential for induction of the melAB operon that is responsible for melibiose metabolism .
Clearly there is a component ( 13 - to 20 - fold ) to the activation by CRP at rhaSR that is independent of both - CTD and RhaR and hence does not function by the same mechanism used at simple class I CRP - dependent promoters , nor does it function through cooperative binding with RhaR .
The effect of cis mutations on Fnr - dependent activation of dmsA - lacZ expression is shown in the lower right portion of the figure . ß - galactosidase activity was measured from the cells containing the indicated fusion inserted in single copy at the att site .
Thus , melibiose toggles MelR between a state where it represses pmelR and is unable to activate pmelAB to a state where pmelR is derepressed and pmelAB is activated .
Binding of NagC and Mlc to nagE operators in vivo As Mlc showed a stronger affinity for the nagE operator than NagC , it seemed possible that Mlc might be able to regulate the nagE promoter in the absence of NagC in vivo . ThreenagE – lacZ fusions were tested : the standard ‘ loop - forming ’ nagBE – lacZ fusion , whose expression is repressed by NagC binding co - operatively to the nagE and nagB operators ; and two single operator nagE – lacZ fusions , missing the nagB promoter / operator , but carrying the same nagE – lacZ junction .
In the present study , we first identified two positively charged amino acids in 70 , K593 and R599 , and three negatively charged amino acids in RhaR , D276 , E284 , and D285 , that were important for RhaR - mediated transcription activation of the rhaSR operon .
These results suggest that GntR negatively regulates the expression of the GntII genes .
Thus , although Fis and IHF repress FNR - dependent activation of pnir , they do not prevent FNR binding .
( 2000 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
A common phenotype associated with transcriptional activation of micF by Rob , SoxS and MarA is multiple antibiotic resistance .
Since both Lrp and ArgP stimulate argO expression and bind to overlapping targets in the argO control region , we were interested in analysing potential interferences in the action of these transcriptional activators on argO expression , in response to environmental conditions .
The fact that most Fnrdependent promoters have the latter architecture may be due to the fact that many of them are also activated by the NarL protein ( e . g . , the narG , fdnG , nrfA , and nirB promoters ) .
S1 mapping located transcriptional start points and showed that RhaR , and possibly RhaS , positively regulate transcription from thcb structural gene promoters as well as transcription from their own promoter .
Microarray analysis revealed that NsrR represses nine operons encoding 20 genes in Escherichia coli MG1655 , including the hmpA , ytfE , and ygbA genes that were previously shown to be regulated by NsrR .
Studies of the araBAD promoter , p BAD , show that to activate transcription the AraC protein binding site must overlap the 35 region of the promoter by 4 bp ( 25 ) ( Fig . 1 ) .
Activation by Lrp interferes with the previously demonstrated activation of the argO promoter by ArgP .
The finding of only one MetR binding site suggests that the binding of MetR to this region may be responsible for both the activation of expression of metE as well as the autoregulation of metR ( 20 , 36 ) .
Sufficiency of Rob for in vitro transcriptional activation of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA , promoters known to be activated by MalE - SoxS and MarA .
Because previous studies have shown that the MarA - binding sites of two other repressed promoters ( hdeA and purA ) lie in a backward orientation ( 20 ) and either partially or completely overlap the - 35 hexamer , we examined whether the putative rob marbox might be in a similar configuration and position .
DISCUSSION The napF operon exhibits a unique pattern of expression and a unique control region architecture in comparison to other characterized E . coli Fnr - and Nar - regulated operons .
As at the nrf promoter , the nir promoter can be activated by FNR alone but FNRdependent activation is repressed by IHF and Fis ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
We previously demonstrated that in vitro transcriptional activation by MarA at the zwf promoter requires interaction with the carboxy - terminal domain of the a subunit of RNA polymerase ( 21 ) and inferred that MarA activates the mar promoter by enhancing the binding of RNA polymerase ( 27 ) .
At low to intermediate levels of nitrate ( 2 to 6 mM ) NarP appeared to antagonize the ability of NarL to activate fdnG operon expression .
A revised model for NarL - dependent activation of nirB gene expression is shown in Fig . 9 .
We also monitored expression from a previously constructed ( frdA - lacZ ) gene fusion for which both Dcumediated activation and Nar - mediated repression are well documented .
Although most NarLdependent promoters are also co - dependent on a second transcription factor , FNR protein , two targets , the yeaR and ogt promoters , are activated by NarL alone with no involvement of FNR .
The rbsDACBK operon is the only target of regulation so far identified to be under the control of RbsR ( Lopilato et al . , 1984 ; Mauzy &amp; Hermodson , 1992a ; Laikova et al . , 2001 ) .
micF RNA is a sufficient factor for functional inactivation of ompF mRNA ; however , it is essential but not sufficient for chemical inactivation of the message ; additional factor ( s ) are involved in mRNA destabilization .
Similarly , the homologous NarL and NarP proteins of the nitrate regulon bind to the same sites but regulate differentially ( Darwin et al . , 1997 ) .
FNR can only activate transcription at the E . coli nirB promoter when the FIS and IHF repressors are removed by the binding of NarL or NarP ( Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
Thus , stimulation of b1452 was dependent on MarA and a region ( – 131 to – 111 ) identified as a potential binding site for the activators . map and mdaB .
It has been shown previously that all three transcriptional factors ( MarA , SoxS , and Rob ) regulate the expression of themselves ( 16 , 17 ) and each other ( 15 – 18 ) .
The transport of glucuronides and their subsequent interconversion to the glucuronate in E . coli is mediated by the genes of the uidAB operon , which is under negative regulation by UidR and UxuR ( Blanco , 1987 ) .
The strong upregulation of nfnB by the plasmidspecified MarA observed in this study contrasts with the reported weaker upregulation of NfnB activity and nfnB expression by SoxS ( Liochev et al . , 1999 ; Pomposiello et al . , 2001 ) .
To verify that Mlc does bind preferentially to the nagE operator in vivo , the effect of plasmids overproducing either Mlc or NagC was tested in a strain mutated for both mlc and nagC . Plasmids expressing either NagC or Mlc produce considerable repression of the nagBE – lacZ looped fusion , reducing expression 88 - and 56 - fold ( Table 2 ) .
Thus , at pnirB , NarL and NarP activate transcription by an indirect mechanism , rather than by interacting directly with the transcription machinery ( Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
We show in this study that strains with null mutations in either argP or yggA exhibit abnormally increased sensitivities to CAN ( Can ss ) and that ArgP is a transcriptional regulator of yggA that mediates the latter ’ s induction by Arg .
CAT fusion analysis revealed that the operon has a promoter for gntR and another for gntKU , and that the gntR gene is constitutively expressed , while that of gntKU is regulated positively by the cAMP - CRP complex and negatively by GntR .
The same concentration and batch of MarA protein , on the other hand , repressed both purA and hdeA ( Fig . 2 ) .
Also , both half - sites of the Fnr recognition sequence at dmsA are required for Fnrdependent expression and are similar in their ability to activate dmsA transcription .
RhaR regulates transcription of rhaSR by binding promoter DNA spanning 32 to 82 relative to the rhaSR transcription start site .
If the MetR protein synthesized from pRSE562 was responsible for the observed increase in MetH synthesis , the MetJ protein and AdoMet , if added to the first incubation , should inhibit the increase by preventing MetR synthesis .
Compared with other operons regulated by NagC , nagE - BACD and glmUS , it is very likely that the repression complex involves an interaction between NagC bound to its two sites , NagC1 and NagC2 , so that a DNA loop is formed .
Altogether , these data indicate that ArgP is able to activate transcription from the dapB promoter , provided that some sequences upstream of 81 are present , and is necessary for lysine to repress dapB expression .
The expression of dnaA gene decreased after initiation of chromosomal replication ( Theisen et al . , 1993 ) .
A 3.4 - fold decrease of citC - lacZ induction was observed when DcuR was inactivated ( IMW554 ) .
( 2001 ) Transcriptional regulation in the Escherichia coli melibiose operon : interations of MelR and CRP .
ArgP and cadBA regulation .
The wild - type ( W + ) and mutant strains indicated were analysed as in the legend to Fig . 2A . © 2007 The Authors Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 63 , 1223 – 1236Regulation of fimB by Neu 5Ac and GlcNAc 1229 lower level of fimB expression , as would be expected if it prevents activation by both NagC and NanR .
Together , these results indicate that Lrp upregulates expression of cadBA .
( B ) Transcription activation by RhaS expressed from the chromosome in SME1048 ( wild - type rhaSR ) .
Moreover , almost all genes from the KdgR regulon are regulated by CRP in E . chrysanthemi ( Nasser et al . , 1997 ) .
The three activators may have different quantitative effects on particular promoters , for example SoxS activates fpr to a much greater extent than does MarA .
174 , No . 15 Localization of Upstream Sequence Elements Required for Nitrate and Anaerobic Induction of fdn ( Formate Dehydrogenase - N ) Operon Expression in Escherichia coli K - 12 JING LI ' AND VALLEY STEWART ' 2 * Sections of Microbiology ' and Genetics &amp; Development , 2 Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 - 8101 Received 25 March 1992 / Accepted 19 May 1992 Two transcriptional activators , the FNR and NARL proteins , are required for induction of the fdnGHI operon , encoding Escherichia coli formate dehydrogenase - N .
GntR represses the GntI genes gntKU and gntT , whereas GntH was previously suggested to be an activator for the GntII genes gntV and idnDO - gntWH .
Regulation of the repressed basal level as well as the induced level of expression of the arabinose operon in Escherichia coli involves DNA looping mediated by the AraC protein , AraC proteins bound to two distinct DNA sites and bound to each other to form a DNA loop ( 1 - 4 ) .
In this study , we have examined promoter - lac fusions in strains that were argP or argP or that were carrying dominant argP mutations in order to identify several new genes that are ArgP - regulated in vivo , including lysP , lysC , lysA , dapD , and asd ( in addition to argO , dapB , and gdhA ) .
Taken together , our results argue that residues Thr158 , Pro160 , Gln164 and Lys166 of CRP participate in transcription activation at the melAB promoter : these residues identify a surface of CRP that overlaps with AR1 ( Figure 4 ) .
The NarL and NarP proteins compete for the 44.5 binding site ; binding of NarP further induces aeg - 46.5 operon expression , whereas binding of NarL has no significant effect on the basal anaerobic ( Fnr - dependent ) level of expression .
The extent of oligomerization of DnaA protein appeared to be proportional to the inhibition of RNA polymerase binding to the promoters and the inhibition of transcription from the promoters .
At the moment we do not know how NagC activates the fimB promoter , but two general scenarios seem most plausible .
To determine whether ArgP directly regulates lysP transcription , we tested binding of ArgP to the lysP promoter / control region .
We investigated whether DnaA protein and RNA polymerase can coexist at the dnaA promoter by gel - shift and footprinting analyses and whether a direct protein - protein interaction between DnaA protein and RNA polymerase is the mechanism of inhibition of transcription .
Although there is no simple rationale for why the yeaR and ogt promoters are also repressed by Fis , we suggest that rapidly growing cells may opt out of certain stress responses , and we speculate that RNS may be a small risk in these conditions compared with other stresses .
We assayed this library of alanine substitutions in 70 at two RhaR - activated single - copy translational fusions , ( rhaS - lacZ ) 216 and ( rhaS - lacZ ) 92 .
Hence , Fis protein is a major factor responsible for catabolite repression at the nrf promoter , and Fis can override activation by FNR and NarL or NarP .
Since only the NarP protein can activate aeg - 46.5 operon expression ( again , presumably by interacting with RNA polymerase ) , the competition from NarL for the binding sites would lead to an antagonization of NarP activation .
Concluding remarks The hcp gene has been shown to be regulated by FNR , NarL and NarP proteins .
Although DnaA protein , at concentrations of 75 ng and greater , reduced transcription from rpmH promoter 1P , repression was preferential for the dnaA promoters .
Two other regulators , OmpR and CpxR , activate nanC expression , although a direct control has not been proven .
It is interesting to note that the three central operators , galOE2 , OE3 and OE4 , which have higher affinity for GalS than GalR , all have A / T at positions 8 of the operators ( Fig . 1B ) which is also the case for the mglB and galS operators ( Weickert and Adhya , 1993a , b ) which are preferentially regulated by GalS .
Additionally . the activation of t , he lac promoter and arnC ’ B . 4 I ) 1 ) ~ CRP is similar in that CRT ’ shows the S ~ IIIP orientation tlependcnce in both operons : as in nrtc ( ‘ H ~ ~ lO , CRT ’ can partially activate the lnc promoter when its distance from the promoter is increased by 11 base - pairs , but not by five base - pairs , both in uiuo ( Mandecki $ Carut ’ hers , 1984 ) and in r * itro ( St . raney et n / .. 1989 ) .
This suggested that the hyb operon is subject to catabolite repression mediated by the cAMP - CRP system ( Busby &amp; Kolb , 1996 ) .
Among functions that could contribute to cellular resistance to environmental agents , Rob enhances expression of mdlA , which encodes a multiple - drug - resistance - like ATP - binding component of a transport system ( 3 ) , and strongly enhances expression of micF , the antisense RNA that downregulates the outer membrane porin OmpF .
Other unknowns are how OmpR activates micF transcription while binding at far upstream sequences , i . e . in the - 156 to - 216 region ( Figure 4 ( a ) ) .
MarA upregulates expression of nfnB Both oxygen - insensitive nitroreductases nfsA and nfnB were shown to be upregulated by constitutive expression of MarA from plasmid pAS10 ( Barbosa and Levy , 2000 ) .
Samples were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel , run , and analyzed by autoradiography . gave a single retarded band of mobility similar to that observed with purified His 6 - ArgP protein , whereas crude extracts devoid of ArgP gave no retarded band ( Fig . 3B ; see also Fig . 5A ) , indicating that no protein other than ArgP is able to bind significantly to the dapB promoter region .
Since the same level of activation is seen with the truncated single operator site nagE – lacZ fusion it implies that no DNA important for CAP stimulation of nagE – lacZ expression is situated beyond – 100 .
The results of this analysis confirm this assertion , and show additionally that NagC is also better able to We previously presented evidence suggesting that the D2 region , and hence NanR and NagC , could activate fimB expression by blocking the inhibitory effect of additional cis - acting element ( s ) positioned closer to nanC ( El - Labany et al . , 2003 ) .
The mechanism of IciA protein stimulation of transcription from dnaA promoter 1P in the presence of inhibitory amounts of DnaA protein was examined .
30 , No . 12 The fact that a poor binding site at – 35 enhances transcription activation by MelR emphasises the importance of the cooperative interactions between MelR proteins at adjacent sites in pmelAB .
Table 1 shows that two amino acid residues of 70 R4 are required for Rob - dependent activation of fumC and that only one is required for activation of micF .
In vivo S1 nuclease - protection assays ( Fig . 4 ) and in vitro run - off transcription assays ( Figs 5 and 6 ) indicate that IciA protein specifically activates transcription from dnaA promoter 1P .
Alternatively , - CTD residues 321 , 322 , and 323 were defective at a rhaBAD promoter fusion that was activated only by the RhaS protein .
The ArgP - binding site for argO extends up to nucleotide 20 and thereby overlaps the 35 promoter motif , whereas the ArgP - binding site for lysP extends up to position 47 , which is upstream of the 35 promoter site ( Fig . 2 ) .
( ii ) Relief of the repression by the narL mutation indicated that the gene product , which activated the narC operon ( 36 ) , was also required for repression of thefrd operon .
We report here the existence of a " mar / soxbox " upstream of the - 35 hexamer which binds MarA and enables activation of mar transcription by MarA and SoxS both in vitro and in vivo .
Therefore , a straightforward interpretation of our results , as further discussed below , is that ( i ) ArgP is a transcriptional activator of yggA , ( ii ) ArgP ’ s activator function is enhanced by Arg and inhibited by Lys , and ( iii ) yggA encodes an Arg ( and CAN ) exporter in E . coli .
However , it is clear that they allow coordination of nanC and fimB expression , since NanR and NagC repress one and activate the other of these divergently arranged genes .
The artPIQM operon is , besides being downregulated by Lrp ( Hung et al . , 2002 ) , also repressed by ArgR ( Caldara et al . , 2007 ) .
It is conceivable that the primary function of the RhaS protein is to positively activate transcription from a gene ( s ) encoding a rhamnose transport protein ( s ) .
Why , then , is CAP sufficient to activate the gal operon but not p FGH ?
We reasoned that MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter must be less efficient in these mutants .
Indeed , the GalS isorepressor was discovered because , in the absence of GalR , there was some residual repression of the galE gene .
Mutational analysis of the nirB and nrfA operon control regions has identified cis - acting regions that are required for both NarL and NarP - dependent induction ( Tyson et al . , 1994 ) .
The results described above indicated that ArgP binds the lysP regulatory region to mediate its nearly 35 - fold transcriptional activation and that the absence of such ArgP binding either in argP mutants or upon Lys supplementation in argP strains results in very low levels of lysP expression .
NagC repression is critical in maintaining chiP mRNA levels low enough , relative to ChiX , to allow full silencing by this sRNA .
Considering the in vivo and in vitro data presented in this work , the mechanism by which ArgP regulates argO transcription ( 24 ) , and the known capacity of Lrp to alter the shape of the DNA by inducing bending and wrapping ( 57 ) , a model for lysP regulation in which binding of Lrp to the lysP control region may favor and / or stabilize the ArgP - RNA polymerase - DNA complexes or introduce DNA conformational changes is conceivable .
NorR usually regulates cytoplasmic NO reductase norVW and sometimes another membrane - bound NO reductase ( norB ) and the NO dioxygenase hmp .
In addition , the PQ - or SoxSresponsive genes gatABD , gltA , nfnB , and ybjC were recently shown to be activated by constitutive expression of MarA ( 5 ) .
Note that 0.5 mM GlcNAc or glucose , when present alone , is depleted by A 650 = 0.12 . © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 71 , 146 – 157NagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 149 corresponds to the strength of the galactose - derepressed galP promoter and implies that the long fusion is better repressed than the short fusion .
Despite overlapping regulation by SoxS , MarA , and Rob , the three systems exhibit differential control in terms of both the strength of their effects on individual genes and activation of some promoters uniquely ( e . g . , zwf by SoxS or MarA but not by Rob ) .
Ribose catabolism of Escherichia coli : characterization of the rpiB gene encoding ribose phosphate isomerase B and of the rpiR gene , which is involved in regulation of rpiB expression .
Similarly , at the FNR - activated NarL - repressed dmsA promoter NarL protects a large region that includes the sites for both FNR and RNA polymerase binding ( Bearson et al . , 2002 ) .
For the marbox transversion mutants ( no . 7 and 8 ) which are insensitive to stimulation by Rob , the presence of Rob increases the transcription of the chromosomal marRAB promoter and therefore only increases the repression of the mutant fusions .
Fis and FNR moderate catabolite repression at the nrf promoter The locations of the different mutations that relieve catabolite repression at the nrf promoter suggest the involvement of Fis , FNR and , possibly , IHF ( Fig . 6 ) .
In a nagC strain , the threefold increase in chbB – lacZ expression compared with the wild type is , as expected , eliminated by the NagC plasmid .
This Fnr ( D154A ) protein was able to activate ( napF - lacZ ) expression in vivo ( data not shown ) .
This shows that we had failed to identify MelR mutants with improved specificity for the changed KK433 MelR - binding sequences ; mutants with specificity for the KK433 sequence would have given lower levels of activation with the wild - type melAB promoter .
This suggests that occupation of the IHF II site increases FNR - dependent activation of pnir .
In this study we confirmed the location of the Fnr - binding site at position 64.5 and supported the idea that the mechanism of Fnr - dependent activation of napF expression is distinct from that of promoters with the Fnr - binding site at position 41.5 .
As shown previously ( Wang and Kaguni , 1987 ) , purified DnaA protein repressed transcription from the dnaA promoters , 1P and 2P ( Fig . 5A ) .
Therefore , the 22 heptamer site is a critical site for mediating NarL repression of nrfA gene expression .
In contrast , the repression of both soxS and rob by SoxS , Rob , or MarA occurs via a yet to be identified binding site ( s ) within the sox and rob promoter regions ( 15 , 16 ) .
Since we have shown previously that MalE - SoxS and MarA are sufficient for the in vitro transcriptional activation of the zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA promoters ( i . e . , additional factors are not required ) ( 18 , 19 ) , we conducted similar studies with purified Rob protein .
Overproduction of IciA protein enhances in vivo transcription from dnaA promoter 1P The recombinant plasmid pIC1 contains the iciA coding region under control of the inducible araB promoter of vector pING1 ( Hwang et al . , 1992 ; Johnston et al . , 1985 ) .
The mutation in nagO1 behaved as expected : expression was higher in glycerol , giving a © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 71 , 146 – 157NagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 151 value comparable to the nagC mutation and expression was strongly increased by growth on galactose .
The ArgP - mediated induction of yggA expression is also observed upon the addition of the Arg biosynthetic precursor citrulline ( Fig . 3 ) or ornithine ( data not shown ) , most likely by virtue of its conversion to Arg within the cells .
Since the results above suggested that the argO regulatory region upstream of 89 is not required for ArgP binding , we tested fragments with increasing length of downstream sequence in the EMSA experiments .
Strikingly , all induction is lost with the JK14 fragment , showing that MelR binding to Site 1 and Site 1 0 is essential for activation of the melAB promoter .
Thus , the dcuSR operon control region contains an authenticated 7 - 2 - 7 heptamer pair for phospho - NarL binding overlapping the likely 35 region of the promoter ( Fig . 2B ) and therefore positioned appropriately to effect the observed repression ( Table 2 ) .
MarA activates the expression of diverse genes , including acrAB , micF , mlr - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 , slp , and inaA , which endow cells with resistance ( 3 ) .
We show here that MarA directly represses both purA and hdeA .
NagC is best characterized as a repressor ( Plumbridge , 2001 ; Plumbridge and Pellegrini , 2004 ) , although the regulator does activate one of the glmUS operon promoters albeit by binding at the more conventional position of - 47 relative to the transcriptional start site ( Plumbridge , 1995 ) .
The 32 P - end - labelled fragments were incubated with the indicated amounts of IciA protein and subjected to gel - shift analysis as described in the Experimental procedures . # 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 19 , 389 – 396Transcriptional activation of the dnaA gene by IciA protein 391 Fig . 3 .
The current studies support our previous suggestion that transcription activation at pmelAB requires the binding of MelR to site 2 , which overlaps the – 35 sequence of the promoter ( 20 ) .
With one exception , each of the different single MelR substitutions results in a small reduction in the MelR - dependent repression of pmelR .
Based on data from in vitro studies , Celis suggested that wild - type ArgP both represses its own transcription and activates that of argK ; he also sought to explain the Can r phenotype associated with the argP d mutation on the assumption that it is a loss - of - function ( that is , dominant - negative ) allele whose product is unable to efficiently activate the genes involved in Arg uptake , including argK ( 12 ) .
These observations confirm the importance of the 64.5 sequence in the Fnr - dependent induction of aeg - 46.5 operon expression .
However , in vitro experiments show IHF to repress ompC transcription from two of its three promoters .
Many Cel + strains carry mutations in nagC The NagC repressor that regulates the nag operon involved in N - acetylglucosamine metabolism was also shown to regulate the chb operon ( Plumbridge and Pellegrini , 2004 ) .
The impact of DcuR on citC expression might be due to a transcriptional activation of citAB by DcuR , as discussed below .
nanC expression was predicted to be regulated by the two - component regulatory system CpxR - CpxA by transcriptome analysis ( 16 ) .
The expression of araC is repressed by its own product and stimulated by the CAP system ( 5 ) .
Thus , the melR promoter is not efficiently repressed by MelR and MelR is overexpressed .
acrZ is regulated by MarA , Rob , and SoxS .
The phospho - DcuR protein is known to activate the transcription of three operons : the dcuB - fumB operon encoding the DcuB carrier and fumarase B , the frd - ABCD operon encoding fumarate reductase ( Fig . 1C ) , and the dctA gene encoding the aerobic C 4 - dicarboxylate transporter ( 2 , 17 , 18 , 67 ) .
Role of CRP in activation of the melAB promoter The results from the in vitro studies reported above suggest that CRP interacts directly at the melAB promoter .
This is particularly true in the case of nagB , but activation of nagE requires in addition protein – protein interactions between CAP and the RNA polymerase machinery .
It should be noted ( lanes 1 - 4 ) that although plasmid pRSE562 directs the synthesis of the MetR protein there is still a large stimulation of metE expression by added MetR protein .
Activities were used to measure MelR - dependent activation of pmelAB and MelR - dependent repression of pmelR .
This result again demonstrates that SoxS activation of the mar promoter is dependent on a functional marbox ( 27 ) .
NarX and / or NarQ sensors , both NarL and NarP are phosphorylated where either response regulator can then activate nrfA gene expression .
These results fit with a model in which ArgP contributes to enhanced transcription of dapB when lysine becomes limiting . * Corresponding author .
Measurements of b - galactosidase activities in the resulting transformants indicated that none of the single base changes in MelR binding site 2 significantly affected MelR - dependent activation of the JK22 melAB promoter ( data not shown ) .
Results in Fig . 2B ( lanes 4 – 6 , 10 – 12 ) show that NarL can enhance FNR - dependent activation of the nrf promoter .
To explore the possible mechanisms involved in the integrated transcriptional activation by Fnr and NarL we have extended our studies to the c / s - acting regions required for expression of the narKgene , which encodes another component involved in nitrate respiration , a nitrate - nitrite antiporter ( Noji et ai , 1989 ; DeMoss and Hsu , 1991 ) .
Both intact Rob and the N - terminal fragment activated expression of stress genes ( inaA , fumC , sodA ) but with a pattern distinct from that found for SoxS and MarA .
We suspect that this may account for the downregulation of FNR - dependent activation of the nrf promoter by IHF , but this is unproven .
In silico analyses and experimental verification of potential binding sites for Lrp in the argO control region The formation of multiple Lrp – argO operator complexes with a different apparent stoichiometry suggests the existence of several binding sites for Lrp in the argO control region .
The NagC - regulated nagB – lacZ fusion has been described previously ( Plumbridge and Kolb , 1998 ) .
From this , we conclude that the MelR - binding Site R plays an essential role in MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter .
For example , the expression of nitrate reductase is stimulated by NarL whilst fumarate reductase is repressed , thus ensuring that nitrate is used as an electron acceptor in preference to fumarate .
The enhanced binding of RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoter 1P by IciA protein was confirmed using a DNase I protection assay ( Fig . 4C ) .
Q 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 36 , 211 ± 222Activation at the E . coli melAB promoter 219 which transcription activation at the melAB promoter is absolutely dependent on the occupation of Site 2 0 by MelR .
For example , binding of Lrp to the isolated strong binding site 2 of the ilvIH control region occurred in the nM range ( Cui et al . , 1996 ) but , in contrast , binding to site 2 of the pap operon could not be detected by EMSA , although this site was successfully used for the growth of co - crystals ( de los Rios and Perona , 2007 ) .
RhaR activates transcription of the operon that encodes the two activator proteins , rhaSR ( 37 , 38 ) .
Role of multiple CytR binding sites on cooperativity , competition , and induction at the Escherichia coli udp promoter .
RhaR activates transcription of rhaSR , and RhaS activates transcription of the operon that encodes the L - rhamnose catabolic enzymes , rhaBAD , as well as the operon that encodes the L - rhamnose transport protein , rhaT .
We identified amino acid residues in the C - terminal domain of 70 and in RhaR that are important for RhaR - mediated transcription activation at the rhaSR promoter .
Although the role of CAP in repression of nagE – B is likely to be purely architectural , it is clear that a major part of the CAP activation of nagE is due to protein – protein contacts between CAP and RNA polymerase .
c The Authors Journal compilation c 2009 Biochemical SocietyTranscription activation by Escherichia coli NarL protein 251 Figure 1 NarL regulates the E . coli yeaR promoter ( A ) This Figure shows the E . coli K - 12 yeaR promoter sequence from positions 64 to + 86 with respect to the transcription start site ( + 1 ) ( 12 ) .
This results in the formation of a repression loop and the repression of the araC promoter by AraC ( reviewed by Schleif , 1996 ) .
Expression of the operon , consisting of marR , marA , and marB , is normally repressed by MarR but can be induced by diverse compounds such as tetracycline , chloramphenicol , menadione , and salicylates ( 6 , 16 , 28 ) .
The fact that the same level of CRP - dependent transcription activation is seen in vitro with both RNAP preparations argues that CRP activates transcription at the melAB promoter independently of aCTD .
In the previous regulatory model , the expression of waaP and waaY was regulated by RfaH ( SfrB ) , an antiterminator protein , and this regulation was achieved over the whole transcript from the top promoter in front of waaQ ( 29 ) .
General de Bibliotecas 198.143.33.17 - 1 / 11 / 2016 5 : 09 : 44 PMand then the GntII genes become induced by GntR bound to HRII followed by GntH as described above .
( 2009 ) 420 , 249 – 257 ( Printed in Great Britain ) doi : 10.1042 / BJ20090183 249 Competition between NarL - dependent activation and Fis - dependent repression controls expression from the Escherichia coli yeaR and ogt promoters Derrick J .
Effect of excess ChbR and NagC on repression of the chbB – lacZ fusion . wild type nagC chbR pTZ ( NagC ) 48 ± 6 47 ± 3 83 ± 4 pTZ ( Mlc ) 42 ± 4 62 ± 3 56 ± 4 pTZ ( ChbR ) 2.3 ± 0.2 32 ± 2 2.8 ± 0.5 pTZ control .
Introduction The expression of respiratory nitrate reductase in Escherichia cotiis regulated at the level of transcription by two pleiotropic rrans - acting factors , Fnr and NarL ( Stewart , 1982 ) .
Scanning - replacement mutagenesis of the region separating O NC1 from O NC2 and the effect of IHF on fimB expression Although the results described above show that O NC1 and O NC2 function together , the distance between the centre of the two operators ( 212 bp ) is longer than for any other NagC - regulated operon .
Experiments using the cat gene cartridge revealed that induction of the gut operon enhances expression of the gutR gene as well as the gutABD and M genes .
Mutagenesis of the Fnr recognition sequence at the dmsA promoter region confirmed the contribution of Fnr in the 100 - fold activation of dmsABC expression and explored the DNA sequence and spacing requirements for the Fnr recognition site at the P1 promoter .
Recent experiments on the mlc - regulated genes showed that although NagC binding to Mlc operators could be detected in vitro , there was no or little regulation in vivo ( 6,17 , unpublished results ) .
These binding sites are located upstream of the Fnr - binding site in the control regions of the NarL - activated narG , fdnG and narK operons .
Dong X , Li S , DeMoss J : Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
Molecular Microbiology ( 1996 ) 19 ( 2 ) , 389 – 396 Transcriptional activation of the dnaA gene encoding the initiator for oriC replication by IciA protein , an inhibitor of in vitro oriC replication in Escherichia coli Yong Sun Lee , 1 , 2 Hakjung Kim 1 and Deog Su Hwang 1 * 1 The Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics , and 2 Department of Microbiology , Seoul National University , Seoul 151 - 742 , Korea .
These studies also show that the cyclic AMP receptor protein ( CRP ) interacts with the melAB promoter and increases MelR - dependent transcription activation .
Cyclic AMP receptor protein and RhaR synergistically activate transcription from the L - rhamnose - responsive rhaSR promoter in Escherichia coli .
NagC represses nagE , encoding the N - acetylglucosamine - specific transporter , while Mlc represses three PTS operons , ptsG , manXYZ and ptsHIcrr , involved in the uptake of glucose .
A greater extent of derepression results from mutation of the external operator site by comparison to the internal operator site mutants , suggesting that binding of GntR to the external site results in a stronger repression of the gntT gene .
We can deduce that cellobiose - 6P is capable of generating an inducing signal for ChbR but not an inducing signal for NagC and that induction of both regulators is necessary for derepressed expression of the chb operon .
As shown previously ( 16 ) , IciA protein activated transcription from the dnaA promoter 1P in the 488 bp EcoRI / HindIII fragment ( + IciA I , + IciA II ) of plasmid pHJ1 without affecting transcription from the promoter 2P ( Fig . 2A and B ) .
As expected , the introduction of the p99G and p146A substitutions derepressed expression from the wild - type promoter , confirming that IHF and Fis binding to the IHF I and Fis I sites represses pnir .
The fourth promoter predicted to be regulated by NsrR was P hcp , the promoter of a two - gene operon encoding the hybrid cluster protein , HCP , and its reductase , HCR .
During the course of this work , it became apparent that GntR might affect gntT expression by a mechanism that is independent of negative control by operator binding as well as activation by cAMP - CRP .
To confirm that the nfnB activation observed in the array study was specifically mediated by MarA rather than by a cell stress response to the constitutive expression of the protein from a multicopy number plasmid , Northern blot analysis was performed on cells in which MarA production was inducible .
To investigate further the involvement of Fis in catabolite repression , the expression of an nrf : : lac fusion was compared in cells with and without a functional fis gene .
Of the remaining seven SoxS - activated genes , five ( nfo , rimK , tolC , fldB , and mdaA ) were activated with values below threshold while one ( ribA ) appeared slightly repressed .
Auto - activation of the marRAB multiple antibiotic resistance operon by the MarA transcriptional activator in Escherichia coli .
The extent of AraC stimulation of araBAD is at least 25 - fold larger .
Fis activates the RpoS - dependent stationary - phase expression of proP in Escherichia coli .
DISCUSSION Physically and functionally heterogeneous complexes containing IciA protein bound to the dnaA promoter were isolated and analyzed in order to address the binding mode of IciA protein to DNA containing the IciA I site and how this binding activates transcription from the dnaA promoter 1P .
To study the ArgP - binding site in the lysP promoter / control region in more detail , DNase I footprinting analysis was performed in the absence and presence of lysine ( Fig . 5 ) .
In the images shown in Figure 9 , the MelR focus is 15 33 nm across the shortest and longest axes of the oval in the complex with the shortened arm ( right hand panel ) , compared to 9 12 nm in the other complex R R DISCUSSION At the E . coli arabinose operon regulatory region , transcription is repressed by the binding of two AraC molecules at two targets that are in the same orientation and separated by 210 bp , and a repression loop forms ( 4,5 ) .
CRP binding upstream of the E . coli malK promoter repositions three molecules of MalT on the DNA such that they are able to activate transcription ( Richet et al . , 1991 ) .
RESULTS CRP both directly and indirectly activates rhaBAD .
Thus , NanR and NagC appear to activate fimB expression independently .
The expression of xylF is negatively regulated by Fis and RpoS at the transcriptional level ( 50 ) , and a putative regulator , xylR , was found downstream of xylFGH .
An important observation was that purified MarA was able to activate transcription in vitro of nfnB .
In contrast , in all three known examples of MarA - repressed genes ( hdeA , purA , and rob ) , the marbox is in the backward orientation and is proximal to or overlapping the RNAP - binding site ( see Fig . 8 ) .
The napF operon provides the only known example of a promoter activated by NarP but not NarL .
Finally , either NarL or NarP was able to activate nrfA - lacZ expression independently of the other , while only NarL could repress expression .
So far , our results demonstrate that ArgP directly binds to the lysP promoter / control region and that the T - N 11 - A sequence located close to the RNA polymerase binding site is important for binding and crucial for lysP transcription .
Similarly , incubation of the pnrf97 EcoRI – HindIII fragment with Fis binds to the nrfA – acs intergenic region and represses transcription At the E . coli nirB promoter , transcription initiation is repressed by the association of the nucleoid - associated factors , Fis and IHF ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
Thus MarA is able to repress the rob promoter after the preformed open complex clears the promoter .
Given that cyclic AMP receptor protein ( CRP ) , the second activator required for full rhaBAD expression , cannot activate rhaBAD expression in a rhaS strain , it was of interest to test whether CRP could activate transcription in combination with RhaS - CTD .
Results in Fig . 5 show that MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter is little altered by the changes in Site 1 ( KK81S3 ) or Site 1 0 ( KK81S4 ) .
First , expression of the inner membrane transporter chbCBA is activated directly by the ChbR protein , which allows entry of Chb - 6P and generation of the specific ChbR - inducing signal ( by action of ChbG enzyme ; Verma and Mahadevan , 2012 ) .
Note that the magnitude of the effect of CRP on activation of the melAB promoter in the in vitro transcription experiment ( Fig . 2B ) is less than might have been expected from the footprinting and in vivo experiments ( Fig . 4 and Table 1 ) .
The expression of ptsG is controlled by Mlc binding to two operators upstream of two promoters , both of which are subject to Mlc repression .
In a similar experiment with a rob + mar strain , excess MarA stimulated mar transcription of a wild - type mar : : lacZ fusion by only 1.6 - fold ( 27 ) .
We previously found that two other DNA - binding proteins , Fis ( factor for inversion stimulation ) and IHF ( integration host factor ) , bind to the nrf promoter and downregulate its activity ( Browning et al . , 2002 ) .
CsrA appears to activate eda expression but does so by an unknown mechanism .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
This indicates that ( i ) the 70 NarL heptamer site is essential for NarL to function as an activator of nrfA expression and that ( ii ) other sites are used for NarL to repress expression independently of the 70 site , in contrast to prior interpretations ( see Discussion ) .
In the repressed strains , JJ100 and its pRCG161 transformant , no metF message was detectable , showing that transcription of both the chromosomal and plasmid - borne metF gene is blocked by the metJ - metK regulatory system .
A plasmid carrying the mlc gene expressed from its own promoter ( pMlc2 , a gift from S . Ichihara ) produced a 10 - fold repression of the manX – lacZ fusion , while a plasmid in which Mlc was under the control of the lac promoter , pTZ ( Mlc ) , reduced expression of the fusion to less than measurable values ( greater than 100 - fold ; Table 5 ) .
Fis represses the ogt promoter by displacing upstream - bound NarL To investigate a role of Fis at the ogt promoter , expression of the ogt : : lac fusion was compared in strain JCB387 and in the fis mutant derivative , JCB3871 .
In the same experiment we also examined the expression of hdeA , which had been observed in another macroarray study to be repressed upon MarA induction in cells ( 5 ) .
In the second part of the present study , we selected another E . coli promoter , the ogt promoter , that transcriptome analysis [ 11 ] had predicted to be activated by NarL alone , and we have used biochemical and genetic analysis to compare its expression and organization with the yeaR promoter .
The major conclusions are that : ( i ) both Lrp and ArgP stimulate P argO in an effector - dependent manner , but to a different extent , ( ii ) the two regulators behave as competitive activators , and ( iii ) ArgP is intrinsically a more potent activator for P argO as compared with Lrp .
( 2004 ) Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP .
Thus , not only does IHF stimulate both FimB and FimE recombination , as well as activate fimbrial expression in phase ON cells , but it is now clear that it enhances fimB expression too .
This results in the repression of transcription , suggesting that the extent of oligomerization of DnaA proteins over two dnaA promoters contributes to the autoregulation of expression of the dnaA gene .
25 , No . 17 © 1997 Oxford University Press The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the dnaA promoter 1P element enhances the binding of RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoter 1P Yong Lee 1,2 , Ho Lee 1,2 , Jeongbin Yim 1,2 and Deog Hwang 1 , * 1 The Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics , 2 Department of Microbiology , Seoul National University , Seoul 151 - 742 , Korea Received May 6 , 1997 ; Revised and Accepted July 11 , 1997 ABSTRACT Transcription of the dnaA gene from the promoter 1P has been shown to be activated in vitro and in vivo by the binding of IciA protein to two sites on the dnaA promoter region [ Lee , Y . S . , Kim , H . , and Hwang , D . S . ( 1996 ) Mol . Microbiol . 19 , 389 – 396 ; Lee , Y . S . , and Hwang , D . S . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 83 – 88 ] .
Concomitant with upregulation of tolC , EvgA upregulated several multidrug resistance genes ( acrAB , emrKY , mdfA and yhiUV ) and showed increased antibiotic resistance that was fully dependent on TolC but only partially dependent on AcrA .
An additional 50 - fold activation of rhaBAD expression occurs when CRP occupies its binding site centered at 92.5 , which places CRP adjacent to RhaS ( 9 ) .
The treB treC operon is negatively regulated by TreR , whose gene treR is located upstream of treB but is not part of the operon .
ExuR regulates expression of the uxaCA , uxaB and exuT operons involved in galacturonate catabolism .
MelRdependent activation of the melAB promoter requires the binding of MelR subunits to four 18 bp sites and the binding of a single CRP dimer to a low - affinity target sequence ( Belyaeva et al . , 2000 ; Wade et al . , 2001 ; see Fig . 1A ) .
These results suggest that the DNA region between 90 and 128 is important for activation at rhaSR and that putative CRP sites 2 , 3 , and / or 4 may be functional CRP sites .
This complex binding pattern and its Lrp concentration - dependent profile strongly suggest the cooperative binding of Lrp dimers to multiple binding sites in the argO control region and the formation of complexes with a different stoichiometry .
In previous work , we found that NarL or NarP activates the nir promoter by binding to a site centred at position - 69.5 and counteracting the repressive effects of IHF and Fis .
To confirm the role of ArgP in the regulation of lysP transcription , the argP gene was cloned into plasmid pBAD24 under the control of the arabinose - inducible promoter ( 18 ) .
476 - 480 , January 1989 Biochemistry In vivo DNA loops in araCBAD : Size limits and helical repeat ( supercoiling / twist / periodicity / linking number deficit / looping energetics ) DONG - HEE LEE AND ROBERT F . SCHLEIF Biochemistry Department , Brandeis University , Waltham , MA 02254 Communicated by Alexander Rich , October 14 , 1988 ABSTRACT Formation of a DNA loop by AraC proteins bound at the aral and araO2 sites , whose center - to - center distance is 211 base pairs , is necessary for repression of the araBAD promoter , PBAD , of Escherichia coli .
This is likely due to the greater extent of activation by SoxS of promoters involved in superoxide defense , e . g . , acnA , fpr , zwf , fumC , and sodA .
Optimal MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter depends on upstream sequences Transcription initiation of the melR promoter is dependent on the binding of CRP to a 22 bp DNA site centered at position 241.5 , but sequences further upstream are not essential ( Webster et al . , 1988 ) .
Taken together , these results support a model in which O NC2 enhances the binding of NagC to O NC1 , with the two sites functioning jointly to control fimB expression .
Again , with the use of the criterion for a significant effect of a substitution as one that reduces transcription to &lt; 80 % of that produced by wild - type 70 , none of the library ’ s substitutions significantly reduced Robdependent transcription activation of the three class II promoters ( i . e . , fumC , micF , and inaA ) ( Fig . 2a – c ) .
We reasoned that the difference between the form of MelR unable to activate pmelAB but competent for repression of pmelR and the alternative form that can activate pmelAB but is unable to repress pmelR might be , in part , due to subunitsubunit interactions .
As expected , expression of known AraC - regulated genes , i . e . , araB , araA , araD , araE , araF , February 2014 Volume 196 Number 3 jb . asm . org 663Stringer et al . FIG 1 ( A ) Validation of putative E . coli AraC target regions identified by ChIP - chip .
P1 drives cotranscription of edd and eda and is induced by growth on gluconate ( 7 ) ; P1 appears to be controlled by GntR ( 20 , 21 , 24 ) , although binding of GntR to the P1 regulatory region was not established prior to this work .
Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
We did not detect any significant differences in RNAP association , suggesting that under these growth conditions , AraC does not regulate expression of a transcript that initiates within dcp .
Introduction of chbR from two Cel + mutants resulted in activation of transcription from the chb promoter at a higher level in the presence of cellobiose , in reporter strains carrying disruptions of the chromosomal chbR and nagC .
Only one other novel AraC - regulated gene identified in this work , E . coli ytfQ , has a known connection to arabinose metabolism ( 39 ) .
However , placing the NanR , IHF and NagC binding sites closer to the fimB promoter enhances the ability of the regulators to activate fimB expression .
Despite the fact that the residual activity of the CAP pc proteins at the two promoters is different in the induced and uninduced conditions , there is a clear qualitative difference in the response of nagE and nagB to the mutant CAPs : 50 – 100 % activation at nagB and maximally 20 % activation at nagE .
Further studies showed that the melR promoter is a typical Class II CRPdependent promoter , activated by a single dimer of CRP , that binds to a 22 bp DNA site centred at position 241.5 with respect to the transcription start point ( reviewed by Busby and Ebright , 1997 ) .
( 2001 ) DNA binding sites for the Mlc and NagC proteins : regulation of nagE , encoding the N - acetylglucosamine specific transporter in Escherichia coli .
Significant primary sequence homology between GntR and GntH , especially in their HTH motifs for DNA binding , led us to hypothesize that GntH , an activator for the GntII genes , represses the GntI genes via GntR - binding elements .
Indeed , the effect of the mutation in OE5 was similar to © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 71 , 146 – 157NagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 153 that in the weakly binding OE2 and OE3 sites ( a mutation in OE4 has not yet been tested ) .
The binding of Fis and IHF inhibits FNRdependent transcription at the nir promoter ( – ve ) .
Combined , the effector modulated activation of argO transcription by ArgP and Lrp must ensure an adapted and fine - tuned synthesis of the transporter in response to environmental conditions .
Apparently , only the NarP protein is competent to activate transcription of the aeg - 46.5 operon when bound to the 44.5 region .
Figure 4 shows autoradiographs from electromobility shift assays designed to investigate how NarL represses FNR - dependent activation of the ynfE promoter .
In the second part of the present study , we investigated the E . coli ogt promoter , which Constantinidou et al . [ 11 ] had also found to be induced by NarL independently of FNR .
It should be remembered that nagE encodes the GlcNAc - specific PTS transporter and the genes for two other PTS transporters ( ptsG and manXYZ ) plus the genes for the central components of the PTS ( ptsHIcrr ) have been shown to be regulated by Mlc ( 6 – 11 ) .
ArgP binds a site upstream of the dapB promoter .
20 - 22,39 Indeed , changing C5 to any of the other three nucleotides severely reduces SoxS - dependent transcription activation of the fpr and zwf promoters .
Taking these results together with those presented above , it is concluded that the cooperative interaction of NagC bound to O NC1 and O NC2 , with IHF bound to the site identified in this work , forms a nucleoprotein complex that activates fimB expression .
Repression of the Escherichia coli melR promoter by MelR : evidence that efficient repression requires the formation of a repression loop .
The promoter for the MarA - activated gene nfnB ( 20 ) , also mixed with gnd DNA , was tested in parallel as a positive control for MarA activity .
Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
Furthermore , even the finding of Celis ( 12 ) that argK is a target for transcriptional activation by ArgP may need to be reexamined , given that ( i ) there is a discrepancy between the expected argK runoff transcript size ( approximately 310 bases ) determined from the promoter mapping data published by Celis et al . in an earlier paper ( 13 ) and that reported by him ( 215 bases ) for ArgP activation experiments ( 12 ) and ( ii ) the promoter ( for argK ) mapped by his group ( 13 ) is within the argK coding region per the genome sequence published by Blattner et al . ( 5 ) ( GenBank accession number AE000375 , wherein argK is annotated ygfD ) .
Mechanism of activation by CRP at rhaSR .
These observations indicate that the inhibition of binding of RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoters is dependent upon the oligomerization of DnaA protein to regions flanking the DnaA box and that the binding of one or two DnaA monomers to the DnaA box is not sufficient for occlusion of RNA polymerase from the dnaA promoters .
Previously , overexpression of Rob was shown to induce multiple antibiotic and superoxide resistance phenotypes ( 3 ) , to activate expression of fumC , inaA , and sodA in vivo ( 3 ) , and to activate the transcription of six mar / soxRS regulon promoters in vitro by mechanisms that are strikingly similar to that of MarA and SoxS ( 22 ) .
When RNAP was added to the rob promoter at 0 ° C prior to MarA addition and then transfer to 37 ° C , MarA inhibited rob transcription ( see Fig . 6B ) .
Both gntT and gntKU are regulated positively by the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein ( CRP ) complex and negatively by GntR ; one GntR - binding element for gntK has been proposed ( 12 , 34 ) , and two GntR - binding elements for gntT were experimentally defined ( 26 ) .
The arabinose operon , structurally similar to the xyl operon , receives both positive and negative modes of regulation involving AraC protein ( 29 ) .
Recent studies have shown that transcription initiation at pnir is repressed by the binding of H - NS ( histone - like nucleoid structuring factor ) , IHF ( integration host factor ) and Fis ( factor for inversion stimulation ) ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Browning et al . , 2000 ) , DNA - binding proteins that play a role in shaping the folded bacterial chromosome ( Azam and Ishihama , 1999 ) .
Purified His 6 - tagged ArgP protein binds with an apparent K d of 35 nM to the dapB promoter in a gel retardation assay , provided that sequences up to 103 are present .
In the presence of 200 nM MarA , there was a 5 – 6 - fold activation in nfnB transcription , as expected ( Fig . 2 ) .
( iii ) Most of the sugar transport operons , whose transcription is activated by CRP , are also under the control of repression by other transcriptional regulatory proteins .
Both Fis and IHF repress in vivo expression from pacsP1 , but have smaller repressive effects on expression from pnrfA .
This demonstrated that either NarL or NarP is required to activate transcription from the hcp promoter .
( 1989 ) DnaA protein regulates transcription of the rpoH gene of Escherichia coli .
It is important to note that the molecular mechanisms of lysinedependent regulation by ArgP differ between argO and dapB ( 2 , 24 ) .
Taken together , our results suggest that CRP site 3 is the major site required for CRP activation of rhaSR expression .
The expression of both fusions was increased by growth on galactose and to a lesser extent by growth on GlcNAc , supporting the hypothesis that NagC is involved in repression of galP ( Table 2 ) .
Next , we attempted to reproduce MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter in vitro .
DNAprotein recognition : demonstration of three genetically separated operator elements that are required for repression of the Escherichia coli deoCABC promoters by the DeoR repressor .
Occlusion of RNA Polymerase by Oligomerization of DnaA Protein over the dnaA Promoter of Escherichia coli * ( Received for publication , June 25 , 1996 , and in revised form , September 13 , 1996 ) Yong Sun Lee § ¶ and Deog Su Hwang From the Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics and the § Department of Microbiology , Seoul National University , Seoul 151 - 742 , Korea DnaA protein , the initiator protein for initiation of Escherichia coli chromosomal replication , has been shown to repress its own expression from two dnaA promoters , 1P and 2P .
GntH expressed as a result represses the expression of the GntI genes as proposed [ Tsunedomi et al . , 2003 ] .
These results together indicated that marbox 3 , and particularly its RE2 , was critical for repression of hdeA by MarA .
However , this idea was contradicted when a single mutation at position 16 ( C to G ) of RE 2 , which has been shown to establish direct contacts with the second of two HTH motifs of MarA ( Rhee et al . , 1998 ; Dangi et al . , 2001 ) , eliminated MarA - mediated activation of the nfnB gene .
Molecular Microbiology ( 2000 ) 36 ( 1 ) , 223 ± 229 Repression of the Escherichia coli melR promoter by MelR : evidence that efficient repression requires the formation of a repression loop Joseph T .
While the soxS gene is under the redox - regulated , positive control of SoxR , marA is under negative control by MarR , a repressor whose DNA - binding activity is regulated by the binding of small molecules with toxic effects ( 1 , 31 , 39 ) .
( 2000 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
The physiological significance of the repression of purA and hdeA by MarA is not known .
There is no obvious effect of the CAP + 6 mutation on nagE expression but this is presumably due to two opposing effects which are of similar magnitude : an 10 - to 15 - fold increase in nagE expression due to loss of repressor binding ( equivalent to that seen for the nagB fusion ) and a 10 - to 15 - fold decrease in nagE expression due to a lack of cAMP / CAP activation ( 5 ; see also below ) .
MelR stimulates transcription initiation at the melAB promoter by binding to four sites centered at positions 120.5 , 100.5 , 62.5 , and 42.5 upstream of the transcript start point .
We show that cooperativity between the three lac operators , mediated through tetrameric Lac repressor , is crucial for repression of the lac operon . ( Oxford University Press 973S . Oehler et al . Results We constructed a set of eight plasmids , each encompassing the lacZ gene under control of the natural lac promoter and the three lac operators ( 01 , 02 and 03 ) either active or inactivated by site directed mutagenesis ( Figure 1 ) in all possible combinations .
Expression of the E . coli argO gene is activated by ArgP , also known as IciA , which is a transcriptional activator of the LysR type transcriptional regulator family ( Nandineni and Gowrishankar , 2004 ; Laishram and Gowrishankar , 2007 ) .
This investigation reveals that the similarity sufficient to guarantee homology is hardly found between the regulatory protein and the regulated protein , except for the relation between the repressor RbsR and the regulated operon rbsDACBK , where RbsR has been indicated to show considerable similarity to the ribose binding protein RbsB ( Mauzy &amp; Hermodson , 1992 ) , and for some of the regulatory proteins that are known to be self - regulated at the level of transcription .
The derepression of the chb operon due to the loss of NagC regulation is still not sufficient to confer a Cel + phenotype .
Q 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 36 , 211 ± 222Activation at the E . coli melAB promoter 213 in vitro and that this activation is dependent on MelR and melibiose .
Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : interactions of MelR with its DNA target site and with domain 4 of the RNA polymerase sigma subunit .
The results , summarized as follows , show that mar can be activated in vivo via either MarA or SoxS acting on the marbox promoter region .
Model for MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter . In the absence of melibiose , MelR subunits occupy Site R and Site 2 forming a repression loop .
These results establish the unconventional napF operon control region architecture , in which the major promoter P1 is activated by the Fnr protein bound to a site centered at 64.5 with respect to the transcription initiation site , working in conjunction with the phospho - NarP protein bound to a site centered at 44.5 .
We reasoned that some part of the melAB promoter might be responsible for the high level of MelRdependent repression of the melR promoter seen with the KK81 fragment .
OmpX synthesis is likely to be regulated positively by MarA , Rob , or SoxS ( Fig . 2 ) .
The relative degrees of repression of the ydhY – lacZ fusion in the presence of nitrite ( approximately twofold ) or nitrate ( ~ 13 - fold ) suggest that NarL - mediated inhibition of FNR recruitment is a key component of the regulation of the ydhY – T promoter , and that NarP - mediated inhibition of RNA polymerase binding is partially overcome by the ability of FNR to recruit RNA polymerase .
We have considered three mechanisms for the activation by Fis of the mar promoter .
This result implies that the binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the IciA I site is required for the activation of RNA polymerase binding to the dnaA promoter 1P .
To determine whether the purified MarA protein affected gene expression , we tested its ability to activate the in vitro transcription of zwf , sodA , micF , and fumC , genes known to be under mar control in vivo , and of fpr and nfo , genes not known to be regulated by mar in vivo but activated by SoxS in vivo and by MalE - SoxS in vitro .
Analysis of the lysP promoter revealed a conserved T - N 11 - A motif , a typical binding site of LysR - type transcriptional regu - VOL .
These results show that the NarP protein activates F ( aeg - 46.5 - lacZ ) expression in response to nitrate and nitrite and that the NarL protein antagonizes this activation .
Expression of hdeA was repressed by induced expression of MarA ( see Ref . 5 , Supplemental Material ) .
We found that purified MarA was sufficient in vitro to repress transcription of both purA and hdeA .
MelR carrying each of the single substitutions is less able to repress the melR promoter , while MelR carrying some combinations of substitutions is completely unable to repress the melR promoter .
Moreover , they found that Rob overexpression activates expression of fumC , sodA , and inaA ( unknown function ) , but not zwf , and that purified Rob forms DNA - protein complexes with DNA fragments containing the micF , sodA , nfo , and zwf promoters ( 3 ) .
It should be mentioned that Plamann and Stauffer ( 35 ) noted that a deletion in this area resulted in a loss of MetR activation of the in vivo synthesis of a metE - lac fusion protein .
( 1999 ) Lrp binds to two regions in the dadAX promoter region of Escherichia coli to repress and activate transcription directly .
Fis , an accessorial factor for transcriptional activation of the mar ( multiple antibiotic resistance ) promoter of Escherichia coli in the presence of the activator MarA , SoxS , or Rob .
Given the proximity of this binding site to the start site for transcription , these results suggest a model where AraC sterically inhibits the binding of XylR and RNA polymerase to the P xylA promoter , consistent with our experimental results .
Presumably , uninduced levels of MarA and / or SoxS mediate a low - level induction of the inaA gene ; the lower basal level of inaA expression in Dmar strains was noted earlier ( Rosner and Slonczewski , 1994 ) .
RhaS activates transcription from rhaBAD , and transcription from the rhaS gene is controlled by RhaR ( 63 , 244 ) .
Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : interactions of MelR with the C - terminal domain of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit .
Transcriptional activation by MarA , SoxS and Rob of two tolC promoters using one binding site : a complex promoter configuration for tolC in Escherichia coli .
This scenario is plausible , because ArgP and Lrp competitively activate argO ( 35 ) .
Thus , antagonization of NarP - independent activation of aeg - 46.5 operon expression by the NarL protein should be more pronounced in the presence of nitrate than nitrate .
Cells carrying KK43 score as Lac ' on Maconkey indicator plates , due to MelR - dependent activation of pmelAB .
These results argue that different conformational states of MelR are responsible for activation of the melAB promoter and repression of the melR promoter .
In spite of such high similarity , Fnr is associated not with the transport system but with the switching of respiration styles ; i . e . under the anaerobic condition , Fnr activates the transcription of anaerobic enzyme genes , repressing the transcription of oxidase gene ( Spiro &amp; Guest , 1991 ) , together with ArcA , one of the response regulators in Group 1 , that represses the transcription of aerobic respiration enzyme genes ( Iuchi et al . , 1990 ; Iuchi &amp; Lin , 1993 ) .
Our results show that Fis plays a key role in catabolite repression at the nrf promoter and that its binding overrides the actions of the other regulators .
The ArgP protein represses its own synthesis Sequences consistent with the consensus for E . coli promoters ( 35 and 10 ) have not been found upstream of the start codon for the iciA ( argP ) gene ( ThoÈny et al . , 1991 ) .
marA expression is repressed by MarR and is derepressed by the interaction of MarR with various phenolic compounds such as salicylate .
Transcriptional activation of the dnaA gene encoding the initiator for oriC replication by IciA protein , an inhibitor of in vitro oriC replication in Escherichia coli .
The simultaneous binding of repressor and activator type proteins to nag DNA implies two corollaries : ( 1 ) NagC does not repress by competition with CAP and ( 2 ) CAP does not activate by displacing NagC .
Thus , if the model proposed above is correct , it seems probable that NanR must make contact with RNA polymerase , or another regulatory factor bound closer to the promoter , in order to activate fimB expression in the wild - type background as well .
Competitive activation of the Escherichia coli argO gene coding for an arginine exporter by the transcriptional regulators Lrp and ArgP .
Our results show that the fucPIK promoter , a complex promoter which ordinarily depends on both CRP and the fucose - specific regulator FucR for its activation , can be activated in the absence of FucR by a mutant CRP that uses three , rather than two , activating regions to contact RNA polymerase .
Two approaches were used to confirm that NsrR is this sixth factor that regulates P nrfA .
Lrp - dependent regulation of lysP and cadBA .
This study demonstrates that MarA can repress the expression of the rob gene both in vivo and in vitro via a marbox sequence located within its promoter .
The results suggest that the NarP protein specifically interacts with the 44.5 region in order to activate aeg - 46.5 operon expression .
DnaA and IciA proteins also independently bound to their binding sites in oriC ( Hwang and Kornberg , 1992b ) .
Ribose catabolism of Escherichia coli : characterization of the rpiB gene encoding ribose phosphate isomerase B and of the rpiR gene , which is involved in regulation of rpiB expression .
This resembles the known co - regulation of acrAB and tolC by the transcriptional factor MarA .
These results suggest that in the presence of gluconate , the expression of the GntI genes was induced at early logarithmic phase and was then repressed by a GntH - dependent mechanism .
These results appear to be consistent with those from the experiments with lacZ operon fusions , as shown in Table 4 , and it is likely that the binding of GntR to a single element ( the R1 sequence ) is capable of decreasing the transcription of the gntKU genes .
We hypothesize that CRP binding to some or all of these sites may influence transcription activation at rhaSR .
In the intact cell , transcription of purA was decreased in cells constitutively producing MarA ( 4 ) .
This change confers partial CRP independence on the melR promoter ( data not shown ) and also causes a small reduction in MelR - dependent repression .
The most intensely examined operon is araBAD , where AraC is required for repression and activation of BAD transcription ( reviewed by Schleif , 1992 ) .
For example , nitrate induction of the narGHJI operon ( 21 ) and the narK gene ( 12 ) is controlled exclusively by NarL , while induction of the fdnGHI operon is controlled principally by NarL , but NarP also effects a degree of control ( observed with a narL mutant ) ( 21 ) .
Thus , maximum activation of the mar regulon promoter inaA depends on the autostimulatory effect of MarA on the mar operon .
One of the ara loops , that involving AraC bound at araO2 and araI , was previously shown to generate repression of araBAD ( 5 - 7 ) .
For instance , Rob has been shown to bind and activate the zwf promoter in vitro but whole cell zwf regulation cannot be activated by Rob , although the gene responds to SoxS and MarA ( Ariza et al . , 1995 ; Jair et al . , 1995 1996a ; b ) .
( 2005 ) Lrp and H - NS – cooperative partners for transcription regulation at Escherichia coli rRNA promoters .
According to the results described here , Lrp participates in the activation of cadBA under inducing conditions .
One of the more striking points in each model is that the NarP protein is nonessential ( i . e . , not a major player ) and that it can function as an antagonist of NarL in its ability to activate nirB or nrfA operon expression .
The TolC level was regulated positively by MarA , Rob , or SoxS .
To further investigate ArgP - mediated activation of dapB transcription , we purified His - tagged ArgP protein ( 17 ) and used it to perform EMSE .
To investigate how IHF activates fimB expression further , the IHF binding site mutation described above was combined with those in O NC1 , O NC2 and O NR alone , and O NC1 O NR in combination , and the expression of the FimB – LacZ chimera was measured ( Fig . 6 ) .
In the case of the ydbC promoter , the differences in transcript levels between the two transformants were at least as great as those for the NsrRrepressed genes , making P ydbE a prime candidate for direct activation by NsrR .
Our results confirm that metJ is autoregulated and demonstrate that much of the regulation is indeed at the level of transcription ( i . e . , repression of the Jl and J2 promoters ) .
The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the IciA I site , which is located 50 to 63 nucleotides from the transcription start site of dnaA promoter 1P , is required to stimulate RNA polymerase binding to the 1P promoter .
However , under inducing conditions , the P cadBA activity in the lrp : : Km r mutant strain was 2 - fold lower than that in the parent strain , suggesting that Lrp stimulates expression of cadBA .
Translation of the chiP mRNA is repressed by base - pairing with the ChiX sRNA .
The greater expression of nagB in the CAP + 6 context than in the CAP – 6 case correlates with the fact that activation by CAP is still possible with the CAP + 6 mutation ( the CAP site is still at – 71.5 ) but not at CAP – 6 , where the CAP site is now located at – 66.5 , i . e . on the other side of the DNA helix compared with RNA polymerase ( 5,18 ) .
Thus , the left and right half - sites are equivalent in their ability to confer Fnr - dependent activation of dmsA gene expression by RNA polymerase .
Both the aerobic and anaerobic expression levels of dcuB were only ca . twofold lower in the arcA mutant ( JRG3841 ) , indicating that ArcA plays no more than a minor role in regulating dcuB expression in response to oxygen ( Fig . 5B ) and that ArcA is not responsible for the FNR - independent mechanism of anaerobic activation of dcuB transcription .
To test this hypothesis further , and to examine the effect of operator - to - promoter distance on NagC activation , the effect of deleting the 274 bp region ( D7 ) described above on fimB expression was also analysed ( Fig . 8 ) .
In the case of the ytfE promoter , repression by NsrR is the dominant regulatory mechanism , though there is also some evidence for anaerobic repression by FNR , as reported previously ( 25 ) .
Our results indicate that the repression of transcription from the two dnaA promoters ( 1P and 2P ) by DnaA protein is promoted by the oligomerization of DnaA protein over dnaA promoters 1P and 2P and that this binding directly prevents RNA polymerase binding to the two promoters .
Recently , we have uncovered a unique regulation that the activator of GntII genes , GntH , exerts negative control of GntI genes [ Tsunedomi et al . , 2003 ] .
Discussion We showed in earlier work that fimB expression , and hence the OFF - to - ON phase switching of type 1 fimbriation , is activated by NanR and NagC and hence repressed Fig . 9 .
CadC - mediated activation of the cadBA promoter in Escherichia coli .
The EMBO Journal vol . 9 no . 4 pp . 973 - 979 , 1990 The three operators of the lac operon cooperate in repression Stefan Oehler , Elisabeth R . Eismann , Helmut Kramer1 and Benno Muller - Hill Institut fur Genetik der Universitiit zu Koin , Weyertal 121 , D 5000 Koin 41 , FRG ' Present address : Department of Biological Chemistry , UCLA , School of Medicine , Los Angeles , CA , USA Communicated by B . Muller - Hill We tested the effect of systematic destruction of all three lac operators of the chromosomal lac operon of Escherichia coli on repression by Lac repressor .
As expected , the RH180 substitution had little effect on CRPdependent activation of the wild - type melAB promoter .
Thus far , only the MarA / SoxS / Rob - binding site within the mar promoter has been identified and shown to be responsible for activation by all three transcription factors ( 17 ) .
Whereas # 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 19 , 389 – 396Transcriptional activation of the dnaA gene by IciA protein 393 Fig . 6 .
2 When the two dnaA promoters were repressed by DnaA protein , IciA protein was able to restore transcription from the 1P promoter with little effect on transcription from the 2P promoter ( 25 ) .
RNA polymerase binding to the region containing dnaA promoter 1P ( lane 3 ) was inhibited by DnaA protein ( lane 4 ) .
The data obtained thus revealed the results after induction by GntH of the GntII genes .
Binding of Fis and IHF to sites centred at positions - 15 and - 54 , respectively , represses FNR - dependent transcription at the nrf promoter .
More recently , ArgP was shown to bind to an approximately 60 - bp - long sequence partially overlapping the argO promoter ( Fig . 1 ; Laishram and Gowrishankar , © 2009 The Authors Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 74 , 1513 – 1526Lrp and ArgP activation of argO transcription 1515 2007 ) .
( 2004 ) Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP .
These observations led us to conclude that GntH might bind to GntR elements and might repress the GntI genes .
165 , 1986 REGULATION OF IN VIVO TRANSCRIPTION OF metJBLF 675 very effectively represses transcription from the first metJ promoter .
Our previous experiments have shown that when both dnaA promoters 1P and 2P were repressed by DnaA protein , IciA protein specifically activated transcription from dnaA promoter 1P , while dnaA promoter 2P was still repressed ( 25 ) .
To more directly test for a role of - CTD in rhaSR activation , we assayed the effect of expressing a derivative of with the entire C - terminal domain deleted , - 235 ( 14 ) , on expression from several rhaSR promoter fusions .
Oxidative stress genes that are transcriptionally activated by both the marRAB and soxRS systems include sodA ( encoding a superoxide dismutase ) , zwf ( encoding glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase [ G6PD ] ) , fumC ( encoding a heat - stable fumarase ) , soi - 17 / - 19 , and the genes encoding two other oxidative stress proteins of unknown function ( 4 , 17 , 18 , 26 , 28 ) .
Recently , a direct regulatory connection between oxidative stress and iron metabolism was shown by Zheng et al . , who demonstrated the transcriptional activation of fur by SoxS and OxyR ( 49 ) .
The enhanced ability of Fnr to activate dmsABC gene expression is possibly , by analogy to Crp , due to increased affinity of Fnr at the consensus versus the native non - consensus Fnr recognition sequence at dmsA .
There are two NagC operator sites upstream of gimU The perfect inverse correlation between the induction of nag and repression of glm genes posed the question as to whether the regulation of glmU expression involved the NagC protein .
Recent studies ( 11 ) have shown that the occupation of site 2 by MelR is the most crucial for the activation of the melAB promoter , but that , of the four target sites , site 2 binds MelR most weakly .
Autoradiographs of EMSA analyses of Lrp binding to the argO control region without and with 7 mM L - leucine in the binding buffer respectively .
It was shown that to activate transcription in P araBAD , the AraC protein binding site must overlap the 35 region of the promoter by 4 bp ( 212 ) .
In vitro activation of the transcription of araBAD operon by AraC activator .
Studies of araE transcription in vitro confirm the results in vivo and show that promoter activity is directly stimulated by AraC and CRP ( Stoner &amp; Schleif , 1983 ) .
Our conclusion runs contrary to that of Han et al . ( 20 ) , who overproduced IciA ( ArgP ) and employed an RNase protection assay to show that nrdA transcription is ArgP regulated in vivo .
DNA - protein recognition : demonstration of three genetically separated operator elements that are required for repression of the Escherichia coli deoCABD promoters by the DeoR repressor .
Previous results reported by Bhende and Egan ( 4 ) identified two amino acid residues in 70 , K593 and R599 , that were important for RhaSmediated transcription activation at rhaBAD and rhaT .
Finally , at the ( rhaB - lacZ ) 110 fusion , which contains the CRP site required for full rhaBAD activation as well as the full RhaS binding site , there was a twofold contribution to activation by CRP when in combination with RhaS - CTD and a fivefold contribution to activation4990 WICKSTRUM ET AL . J .
For example , MarA binds tightly to the marRAB promoter in vitro yet stimulates transcription by only ~ 3 - fold ; no significant binding to inaA can be demonstrated by gel shift experiments , yet transcription is stimulated &gt; 5 - fold .
In summary , these results demonstrate that gntT is positively regulated by CRP .
Dominant - negative AraC mutants that fail to activate transcription of araBAD were selected , and their interactions with specific bases of the binding site were probed with chemically modified DNA .
We postulate that GntH is responsible for repression of the GntI genes when GntR was released from the operator by interaction with gluconate , and for induction of the GntII genes .
( 1997 ) The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the dnaA promoter 1P element enhances the binding of RNA polymerase at to the dnaA promoter 1P .
The dgo operon , encoding the enzymes of galactonate metabolism , is negatively regulated by the dgoR product and specifically induced by galactonate ( 19 ) .
In this study , we show that the global transcription factor FNR is a class II activator at the ynfEFGHI promoter and that NarL represses activation by binding to a single target that overlaps the promoter 10 element .
With a tri - alanine scanning library of amino acid residues of 70 from positions 531 – 590 ( residues 531 – 540 lie in the distal portion of 70 R3 . 2 , residues 541 – 570 lie in 70 R4 . 1 , and residues 571 – 590 lie in the N - terminal portion of 70 R4 . 2 ) , 1,46,47 we recently determined that none of the amino acid residues within this region are required for SoxS - dependent activation of transcription from class II promoters fumC and micF , including some substitutions that replace amino acids that are known to interact with nucleotides of the 35 hexamer .
Curiously , Barbosa and Levy ( Barbosa and Levy 2000 ) found elevated gatA and gatC transcription due to MarA expression , and Pomposiello and colleagues ( Pomposiello et al . , 2001 ) found elevated gatA , gatB and gatD upon treating cells with paraquat , and elevated gatZ , gatA , gatB , gatC and gatD upon treating cells with salicylate .
Recently , the implication of Lrp in the regulation of the gene encoding the arginine exporter ( argO ) was reported .
Miller et al . ( 28 ) have found that SoxS activates mar transcription in vivo , and we have recently found a marbox sequence in the promoter region upstream of marRAB which binds MarA and enables either purified MalE - SoxS or MarA to activate transcription of marRAB in vitro ( 18 , 26 ) .
The need for two specific inducing signals , one for ChbR to activate the expression of the operon and a second for NagC to relieve its repression , ensure that the chb operon is only induced when there is sufficient flux through the combined chb - nag metabolic pathway to activate expression of both the chb and nag operons .
Results in Fig . 2B ( lanes 4 – 6 , 10 – 12 ) show that NarL can enhance FNR - dependent activation of the nrf promoter .
Like MalE - SoxS , MarA ( i ) activated the transcription of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA ; ( ii ) required a 21 - bp " soxbox " sequence to activate zwf transcription ; and ( iii ) was " ambidextrous , " i . e . , required the C - terminal domain of the a subunit of RNA polymerase for activation of zwf but not fumC or micF .
As at the nrf promoter , the nir promoter can be activated by FNR alone but FNRdependent activation is repressed by IHF and Fis ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
They demonstrated that acnA has two promoters , P1 and P2 , the latter being regulated by SoxS , FNR , CRP and ArcA .
( 2000 ) Suppression of FNR - dependent transcription activation at the Escherichia coli nir promoter by Fis , IHF and H - NS : modulation of transcription by a complex nucleo - protein assembly .
In every case , MarA ( E89A ) bound as well as or more tightly ( i . e . , had a lower K D [ equilibrium dissociation constant ) than WT MarA . For several promoter marboxes this change was dramatic : the K D dropped from &gt; &gt; 150 to 50 for inaA , from 200 to 75 for nfsB , and from &gt; &gt; 150 nM to ~ 100 nM for both ybjC and yhbW . In spite of this , MarA ( E89A ) activation was greater than that of WT MarA for inaA , sodA , and ybjC ; it was comparable to that of WT MarA for micF and less than that of WT MarA for fumC , mdaB , nfsB , and ybhW ( Table 3 and Fig . 1 ) . We conclude that the WT glutamic acid of MarA at position 89 is an inhibitor of MarA binding to many marboxes . In an effort to understand why E89 is inhibitory , we examined the sequences of the 14 marboxes for which we have data ( Table 3 ) . We noticed that five haveaTatposition 12 and that the binding to none of these sequences is increased by the E89A substitution ( less than 1.7 - fold ) . In contrast , of the remaining nine sequences that do not have aTatthis position , the binding of E89A was increased for six of them by &gt; 2.5 - fold and for the seventh by 1.7 - fold ; only two do not show increased binding . Although the cocrystal structure of MarA with the marRAB marbox DNA ( with aTatposition 12 ) indicates no interaction between the two molecules at this position ( 36 ) , we considered the possibility that steric hindrance between the marbox DNA and MarA could limit activation by MarA when position 12 is not a T residue ( see the Discussion for a fuller treatment ) . To examine one facet of this possibility , namely , that the glutamic acid side chain of E89 sterically inhibits interaction with marbox DNAs lacking aTatposition 12 , we tested the effects of several amino acid substitutions at residue 89 on the fpr : : lacZ fusion and the mdtG : : lacZ fusion , the two fusions that showed the greatest effects of E89A on activation ( see above ) . Plasmids carrying WT MarA , the MarA variant MarA ( E89A ) ( with a nonpolar single methyl group side chain ) , MarA ( E89G ) ( with no side chain ) , MarA ( E89D ) ( with a side chain one methylene group shorter than glutamic acid ) , MarA ( E89V ) ( with the amino acid present at the corresponding position of SoxS and having a dimethyl methylene side chain , ) , WT SoxS , and SoxS ( V83E ) were introduced into these fusions and assayed for ß - galactosidase . Again ( Table 2 ) , activation of these promoters by SoxS was much greater than that by MarA ( Fig . 3 ) . Similarly , MarA ( E89A ) was considerably more active than WT MarA . In contrast , the E89D variant was less active than WT MarA for fpr and completely inactive ( indistinguishable from the control plasmid ) for mdtG . E89G was approximately twice as active as WT MarA for fpr and 4 - fold more active for mdtG although for both promoters it was considerably less active than E89A . The E89V variant was marginally more active than the WT for both promoters but substantially less so than E89A . SoxS ( V83E ) reduced the activation of these promoters relative to WT SoxS , but SoxS ( V83E ) was still more active than WT MarA . ( The activations shown here are greater than those apparent in Table 2 because the expression of the plasmids carrying MarA , SoxS , and their mutants is not entirely shut off by lacI q so that the increases expressed in Table 2 appear smaller . ) As outlined in the Discussion , these results , namely , ( i ) that variant E89D is virtually inactive , ( ii ) that E89G is very active although to a lesser extent than E89A , ( iii ) that E89V is only marginally more active than the WT , and ( iv ) that SoxS ( V83E ) has reduced activation although not to the low levels expressed by WT MarA , are consistent with the possibility that that the side chain of E89 sterically inhibits interaction with the DNA for marbox sequences lacking aTat position 12 . If , as outlined above and presented in greater detail in the Discussion , steric interference with the phosphate between positions 12 and 13 and the glutamic acid side chain at position 89 is responsible for the very poor activation of promoters such as fpr , then it would be predicted that binding of WT MarA to the fpr marbox would be enhanced if that phosphate were absent . We therefore compared the binding affinity of WT MarA to either a 36 - bp double - stranded DNA containing the marbox sequence of fpr or with dsDNA of the same sequence and length but prepared so that the phosphate linkage between positions 12 and 13 of the marbox was eliminated ( see Materials and Methods ) . Again ( Fig . 2 and Table 3 ) , MarA bound very poorly to the fpr marbox ( Fig . 4 ) . However , binding increased significantly when the fpr DNA lacked the phosphate group between positions 12 and 13 ( Fig . 4A and B ) . In contrast , SoxS bound more tightly to dsDNA than to the discontinuous DNA ( Fig . 4B ) . When the phosphate located 3 nt farther upstream ( between positions 9 and 10 ) was absent , no significant alteration in binding was observed ( Fig . 4 ) although a small increase was observed when the phosphate between positions 15 and 16 was absent . We conclude that the phosphate group between nt 12 and 13 of the consensus sequence inhibits the ability of MarA to bind . Activation and marbox binding by MarA ( Q91A ) . The only other MarA mutation found here to differ significantly from WT MarA in the activation of class I promoters was Q91A ( Table 2 ) . Of the seven class I promoters examined , MarA ( Q91A ) activated the acrAB , marRAB , and zwf promoters to similar extents as WT MarA but activated acnA , fpr , mdtG , and poxB to only 60 % or less of MarA WT levels ( Table 2 ; see also below ) . For the nine class II promoters , MarA ( Q91A ) significantly reduced the activation of fumC , inaA , micF , pqiA , and ybjC but had no significant effect on nfsB , mdaB , sodA , oryhbW . MarA - ( Q91 ) has been identified as forming van der Waals interactions with the methyl groups of the two thymidines that are complementary to the adenines at positions 17 and 18 of the consensus sequence ( 36 ) . Thus , it would be expected that the Q91A substitution might reduce activation of the seven class II promoters that have at least one A at position 17 or 18 but not the two promoters , nfsB and sodA , that have no A residues at these positions . Indeed , nfsB and sodA are among the promoters that Q91A activated to the same extent as WT MarA . Since Q91A reduced the expression of four of the seven class I promoters and four of the nine class II promoters , our results are inconsistent with the proposition that Q91 is principally required for interactions at class II promoters , as has been proposed for the analogous site ( Q85 ) in SoxS ( 16 ) . For the majority of these promoters , the gel mobility assay for binding of MarA to marboxes was insufficiently precise to determine whether there is a correlation between binding and activation by MarA ( Q91A ) relative to MarA ( Table 3 ) . Among the class I promoters that exhibited measurable binding to MarA , MarA ( Q91A ) showed no greater binding or activation for acrAB , a modest reduction in activation and binding for mdtG and zwf , and a reduction in binding but not in activation for marRAB . A modest reduction in binding with a small increase in activation was seen for the class II mdaB promoter . Although not observed in these experiments , a more detailed analysis of the binding of MarA ( Q91A ) to the micF marbox ( using protein without the His 6 tag ) showed a very small reduction in binding concomitant with the reduced ability of MarA ( Q91A ) to activate the class II micF promoter ( 13 ) . Thus , relative to MarA , there may be a correlation between activation and binding for Q91A at class I promoters , but none is obvious with regard to the class II promoters . Activation of superoxide resistance by MarA ( E89A ) . If the glutamic acid at position 89 of MarA is a major determinant in vivo of the reduced activity of MarA at many promoters where SoxS is more active , we would expect cells carrying MarA ( E89A ) to be more resistant to superoxides than cells carrying WT MarA . This was tested with gradient plate assays of sensitivity to two superoxide - generating compounds , phenazine methosulfate ( PMS ) and menadione ( Table 4 ) . Cells constitutively expressing MarA ( E89A ) were more resistant than WT MarA to PMS ( 1.7 - fold ) and , to a lesser extent , to menadione ( 1.3 - fold ) . Comparable MICs with SoxS for PMS were 1.6 - fold and for menadione 2.0 - fold . Clearly , MarA ( E89A ) activates superoxide resistance to a greater extent than WT MarA . Curiously , the Q91A substitution had no effect on resistance to the superoxide generator PMS ( MIC of 35 µM for both the Q91A mutant and the WT MarA ) but lowered resistance to the superoxide generator menadione ( MIC of 0.9 mM for the Q91A mutant and 1.8 mM for the WT ) . DISCUSSION . The MarA - SoxS - Rob regulon of E . coli consists of a variety of genes that enable cells to adapt to multiple stresses . It contains genes that render the cell multidrug and organicsolvent resistant ( acrAB , tolC , and micF ) and that defend against superoxide stress ( e . g . , acnA , fpr , fumC , nfsA , sodA , and zwf ) ( 1 , 2 , 5 , 26 , 31 , 33 ) . Not surprisingly , there are quantitative differences in the extents of activation of particular promoters by the paralogous activators so that the phenotypic outcomes depend on which activator is upregulated ( 2 , 26 , 34 , 43 ) . E89 inhibition . We have shown here that the MarA glutamic acid residue E89 is responsible for decreasing the binding of WT MarA relative to SoxS for the class I marbox promoters , acnA , mdtG , fpr , and zwf , thereby decreasing the relative activation of these promoters and hence the resistance engendered to superoxides by MarA . We think the following may explain these results . A detail of the MarA structure ( Fig . 5 ) shows that E89 is oriented in the cocrystal with its acidic groups exposed to the solvent away from the DNA backbone . In so doing , methyl hydrogens on the ß - and - carbons are positioned restrictively close to an oxygen of the phosphate group between bases T12 and G13 of the marRAB marbox . Even this orientation of E89 is only possible as the result of a small “ clash ” ( as predicted by the MolProbity program [ http : / / molprobity . biochem . duke . edu / ] ) between E89 and S90 that permits the rotation of E89 into the MarA core and away from the DNA backbone .
These data indicate that eda P2 has a high basal level of transcription , is induced by glucuronate , and is repressed by KdgR .
After screening 10000 colonies , we purified six independent pJW15 derivatives carrying simple substitutions in MelR that resulted in detectable activation of mutant pmelAB .
Summary Expression from the Escherichia coli nrf operon promoter is activated by the anaerobically triggered transcription factor , FNR , and by the nitrate / nitrite ioncontrolled response regulators , NarL or NarP , but is repressed by the IHF and Fis proteins .
DISCUSSION Physically and functionally heterogeneous complexes containing DnaA protein bound to the dnaA promoter were isolated and analyzed in order to address the mode of binding of DnaA protein to DNA containing a single DnaA box and how this binding inhibits transcription by RNA polymerase .
Therefore , it was deduced that AlsR regulates the als operon , which contains genes for the transport and metabolism of D - allose .
We previously found that two other DNA - binding proteins , Fis ( factor for inversion stimulation ) and IHF ( integration host factor ) , bind to the nrf promoter and downregulate its activity ( Browning et al . , 2002 ) .
Our analysis revealed that inaA , marRAB , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , and ybiS were transcriptionally activated by constitutive levels of Rob , while galT expression was repressed .
Concluding remarks The hcp gene has been shown to be regulated by FNR , NarL and NarP proteins .
GntR represses the GntI genes gntKU and gntT , whereas GntH was previously suggested to be an activator for the GntII genes gntV and idnDO - gntWH .
In the present study , we have shown not only the positive regulation by GntH , but also a negative and positive regulation by GntR , a repressor for the GntI system , of the GntII genes .
Plasmids overproducing either the NagC protein or the Mlc protein repress the expression of manX , but the effect of the Mlc protein is stronger .
At the same time , GntH may induce the expression of the GntII genes ; this is supported by evidence showing that the GntII genes have an expression peak at the late logarithmic or stationary phase ( unpublished data ) .
Several Rob - regulated genes , such as marA , noted above , seem to encode other regulatory proteins .
( 2004 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : interactions of MelR with its DNA target site and with domain 4 of the RNA polymerase s subunit .
The latter step is critical for the initiation of the entire induction cascade , as the chbBCARFG operon itself is repressed by NagC ( Plumbridge and Pellegrini , 2004 ) .
ExuR regulates expression of the uxaCA , uxaB and exuT operons involved in galacturonate catabolism .
MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter carried by each derivative was then measured , as above .
Hence , Fis protein is a major factor responsible for catabolite repression at the nrf promoter , and Fis can override activation by FNR and NarL or NarP .
DISCUSSION CRP activates rhaSR from at least one newly identified binding site .
Accordingly we reasoned that a loss of fimB expression as a result of decreased NagC activity in the D3 background might be compensated for by enhanced activation by NanR for some reason .
The metJ gene product exists as a dimer with an Mr of 24,000 and has been shown to bind specifically , in vitro , to the region of DNA between metJ and metBL and to the DNA near the metF promoter , causing repression of all four genes ( 24 , 26 ) .
Thus , NarL - mediated repression of the ydhY promoter follows the general pattern established by the frdA and dmsA promoters .
The threefold contribution to activation by CRP in this experiment is very similar to the twofold contribution found in the above in vivo experiment ( Table 3 ) , confirming that RhaS - CTD is sufficient to allow at least partial CRP activation of rhaBAD expression .
MelR and CRP interact at the melAB promoter to activate transcription , but this interaction can be exploited to repress transcription ( Figure 3 ) .
RhaR regulates transcription of rhaSR by binding promoter DNA spanning 32 to 82 relative to the rhaSR transcription start site .
Unlike most other promoters , yhbW seemed to require additional sequence upstream of the – 76 to – 57 site for maximum activation by MarA , SoxS and Rob .
We note that such an effect is not unprecedented for a member of the GntR / FadR family of transcriptional regulators like NanR ( Rigali et al . , 2002 ; Kalivoda et al . , 2003 ) ; activation of the glcDEFGB operon by GlcC and IHF is thought to occur in this way , with IHF bound to a site between the promoter and a distant ( &gt; - 170 bp ) upstream activating site for GlcC ( Pellicer et al . , 1999 ) .
Operons observed to be differentially expressed include not only all four of the transcripts , hmpA , ytfE , ygbA , and hcp - hcr , known or predicted to be NsrR - regulated ( 4 , 40 ) , but also other transcripts predicted to be regulated by nitrite or RNS generated from nitrite , for example , nitric oxide ( 11 ) .
This resembles the known co - regulation of acrAB and tolC by the transcriptional factor MarA .
To determine whether the purified MarA protein affected gene expression , we tested its ability to activate the in vitro transcription of zwf , sodA , micF , and fumC , genes known to be under mar control in vivo , and of fpr and nfo , genes not known to be regulated by mar in vivo but activated by SoxS in vivo and by MalE - SoxS in vitro .
Schematic representation of regulation of araBAD and araC promoters by CAP , P1 , and P2 . negative control of Pc by P1 and P2 .
For example , the nitrate reductase genes narGHJI are regulated exclusively by NarL and are not responsive to NarP as observed here for cydD , while nitrate induction of the fdnGHI operon is regulated predominantly by NarL but is also responsive in part to NarP ( 33 , 39 ) .
We also monitored expression from a previously constructed ( frdA - lacZ ) gene fusion for which both Dcumediated activation and Nar - mediated repression are well documented .
DNase I footprinting studies identified Fisbinding sites that overlap the yeaR promoter NarL site at position 43.5 , and the ogt promoter NarL site at position 78.5 , and suggest that Fis represses both promoters by displacing NarL .
Under identical experimental conditions as for argO , the regulatory regions of the other ArgP - regulated genes ( asd , dapB , dapD , gdhA , lysA , lysC , and lysP ) were also bound by ArgP , with apparent K d s ranging from 55 nM to 170 nM ; in all these cases ( unlike the situation with argO ) , the addition of Lys was associated with an increase in the apparent K d , indicating that ArgP binding in these instances is Lys sensitive .
Upon transformation into strain JCP75 , this plasmid led to red colonies on MacConkey lactose agar plates supplemented with lysine , confirming that ArgP is able to enhance dapB transcription .
In this study , we have examined promoter - lac fusions in strains that were argP or argP or that were carrying dominant argP mutations in order to identify several new genes that are ArgP - regulated in vivo , including lysP , lysC , lysA , dapD , and asd ( in addition to argO , dapB , and gdhA ) .
DISCUSSION The napF operon exhibits a unique pattern of expression and a unique control region architecture in comparison to other characterized E . coli Fnr - and Nar - regulated operons .
NorR usually regulates cytoplasmic NO reductase norVW and sometimes another membrane - bound NO reductase ( norB ) and the NO dioxygenase hmp .
Interestingly , these same three CRP mutants had similar small activation defects at the divergent rhaBAD promoter ( 14 ) .
In previous work , we found that NarL or NarP activates the nir promoter by binding to a site centred at position - 69.5 and counteracting the repressive effects of IHF and Fis .
The repression of the araBAD operon occurs by cooperative interaction between two distal AraC binding sites araOz and urd ( 19 , 39,40 ) .
Upstream repression and CRP stimulation of the Escherichia coli L - arabinose operon .
Similarly , at the FNR - activated NarL - repressed dmsA promoter NarL protects a large region that includes the sites for both FNR and RNA polymerase binding ( Bearson et al . , 2002 ) .
The presence of FNR and CRP consensus sequences upstream of caiF is consistent with the activation of transcription of a caiF - lacZ fusion by these two proteins ( Table 3 ) .
In addition , the PQ - or SoxSresponsive genes gatABD , gltA , nfnB , and ybjC were recently shown to be activated by constitutive expression of MarA ( 5 ) .
The inability of NarL to activate napF operon expression led us to hypothesize that NarL is deficient in the mechanism by which NarP activates transcription from the 44.5 binding site ( 9 ) .
Thus , at pnirB , NarL and NarP activate transcription by an indirect mechanism , rather than by interacting directly with the transcription machinery ( Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
Moreover , they found that Rob overexpression activates expression of fumC , sodA , and inaA ( unknown function ) , but not zwf , and that purified Rob forms DNA - protein complexes with DNA fragments containing the micF , sodA , nfo , and zwf promoters ( 3 ) .
At the same time , it is noteworthy that two of the genes that are most prominently regulated by ArgP , argO and lysP , are both also regulated by the leucineresponsive general transcriptional regulator Lrp ( 37 , 41 ) .
The results suggest that the NarP protein specifically interacts with the 44.5 region in order to activate aeg - 46.5 operon expression .
AraC has previously been shown to repress its own transcription by binding to a region overlapping the araC promoter elements ( 32 ) .
Expression of acrZ is coregulated with acrAB and tolC by the MarA , Rob , and SoxS transcription factors .
OmpX synthesis is likely to be regulated positively by MarA , Rob , or SoxS ( Fig . 2 ) .
Read - through transcription from the gntR promoter into gntK was decreased in the presence of GntR , although GntR did not repress its own promoter .
Auto - activation of the marRAB multiple antibiotic resistance operon by the MarA transcriptional activator in Escherichia coli .
( 2009 ) 420 , 249 – 257 ( Printed in Great Britain ) doi : 10.1042 / BJ20090183 249 Competition between NarL - dependent activation and Fis - dependent repression controls expression from the Escherichia coli yeaR and ogt promoters Derrick J .
With KK433 , cells score as Lac - because MelR binding and pmelAB activation are reduced .
DNAprotein recognition : demonstration of three genetically separated operator elements that are required for repression of the Escherichia coli deoCABC promoters by the DeoR repressor .
aeg - 46.5 operon expression is also negatively regulated by the NarL protein but in this case NarL does not appear to act as a classical repressor .
In order to advance our understanding of the AraC family , we have focussed on the E . coli melibiose operon , which is regulated by MelR , a close homologue of AraC .
However , cells that also contain pJW15 , encoding melR , score clearly as Lac minus , due to the MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter ( i . e . they give pale pink ± white colonies ) .
Thus , transcription of the marRAB operon is autorepressed by MarR and autoactivated by MarA at a site that also can be activated by SoxS .
The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the IciA I site is responsible for the activation of dnaA promoter 1P .
The results show that the dcuB gene is expressed exclusively under anaerobic conditions in a manner that is FNR dependent and that it is repressed by NarL in the presence of nitrate and is subject to CRP - mediated catabolite repression .
Nystrom showed that induction of the RelA protein results in high expression of eda ( 47 ) .
The yeaS ( leuE ) gene of Escherichia coli encodes an exporter of leucine , and the Lrp protein regulates its expression .
This suggestion was based upon observations that HCP is oxidized by hydrogen peroxide , that an hcp mutant is more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide than its parent , and that hcp transcription is regulated by OxyR .
Since we have shown previously that MalE - SoxS and MarA are sufficient for the in vitro transcriptional activation of the zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA promoters ( i . e . , additional factors are not required ) ( 18 , 19 ) , we conducted similar studies with purified Rob protein .
The glmUS operon , which is regulated positively by NagC , also relies upon co - operative binding of NagC to two sites ( 2 ) .
S1 mapping located transcriptional start points and showed that RhaR , and possibly RhaS , positively regulate transcription from thcb structural gene promoters as well as transcription from their own promoter .
This idea seemed a real possibility as similar contacts have been detected in the CytR – cAMP / CAP repression complex at deoP1 ( 44 ; reviewed in 17 ) .
The L - leucine concentration was set at 7 mM , corresponding to the concentration of total leucine in cells grown in © 2009 The Authors Journal compilation © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 74 , 1513 – 1526Lrp and ArgP activation of argO transcription 1517 leucine - supplemented medium ( Quay et al . , 1977 ) .
To determine whether the repression by MarA was direct or occurred by an indirect action , we focused on two genes , purA and hdeA .
We believe that the low - affinity CAP site located between - 130 and - 140 probably does not constitute the site for CAP - stimulation of - the araC promoter , not only because its position ( in relation to the polymerase binding site and transcriptional start point ) is at variance with other CAP sites ( 16 , 17 ) , but also be - A A FIG . 5 .
However , this second screening step identified 11 pJW15 derivatives encoding MelR that were still able to repress pmelR , despite being defective in the activation of pmelAB .
Nevertheless , in contrast to the ydhY – T promoter , where NarP - mediated repression requires a 7 - 2 - 7 site centred at + 10.5 , occupation of which will probably inhibit RNA polymerase binding , the fdnGHI promoter possesses a NarP - binding 7 - 2 - 7 site centred at 2104.5 that is thought to antagonize activation by NarL ( Wang &amp; Gunsalus , 2003 ) .
Our results show that the fucPIK promoter , a complex promoter which ordinarily depends on both CRP and the fucose - specific regulator FucR for its activation , can be activated in the absence of FucR by a mutant CRP that uses three , rather than two , activating regions to contact RNA polymerase .
Other results in Fig . 2A show that FNR - dependent activation of the nrf promoter is repressed by Fis or IHF proteins .
We identified eight genes and confirmed that seven are transcriptionally activated by normal expression of Rob from the chromosomal rob gene ( inaA , marR , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , and ybiS ) .
The data from independent duplicate cultures were completely consistent with NsrR repression of P nrfA [ 1,200 and 1,270 nmol of o - nitrophenyl -  - D - galactopyranoside hydrolyzed min 1 ( mg bacterial dry mass ) 1 for the pGIT1 transformant compared with 180 and 230 units for the pGIT8 transformant ] .
As with MalE - SoxS and MarA ( 18 , 19 ) , Rob stimulated in vitro transcription about threefold from the zwf promoter of templates Z1 , Z2 , Z3 , Z4 , and Z5 ( 9 ) , whose 5 ´ deletion end points reside at positions - 140 , - 86 , - 76 , - 67 , and - 62 , respectively ( Fig . 3A ) but failed to enhance transcription from construct Z6 , whose 5 ´ deletion end point lies at position - 57 ( 9 ) .
To evaluate whether ArgP was involved in the transcriptional regulation of lysP , a nonfunctional argP allele ( argP : : Cam r ) was transduced into strain MG - LR carrying the chromosomal P lysP : : lacZ fusion .
Thus , binding of MetJ to this area could serve to simultaneously repress both metR and metE expression .
Bile salts and fatty acids induce the expression of Escherichia coli AcrAB multidrug efflux pump through their interaction with Rob regulatory protein .
This shows that MelR carrying these substitutions has a reduced requirement for CRP to activate pmelAB .
In vivo S1 nuclease - protection assays ( Fig . 4 ) and in vitro run - off transcription assays ( Figs 5 and 6 ) indicate that IciA protein specifically activates transcription from dnaA promoter 1P .
The inducer for ribose phosphate isomerase B and the mechanism by which RpiR regulates rpiB gene expression remain to be elucidated .
Nitrate - and nitrite - mediated expression of the hcp is dependent on NarL and NarP Sequence analysis of the hcp regulatory region suggested that it contains a binding site for FNR and also binding sites for nitrite - and nitrate - activated regulators , NarL and NarP ( Figure 1 ) .
As expected , expression of known AraC - regulated genes , i . e . , araB , araA , araD , araE , araF , February 2014 Volume 196 Number 3 jb . asm . org 663Stringer et al . FIG 1 ( A ) Validation of putative E . coli AraC target regions identified by ChIP - chip .
In the case of the ydbC promoter , the differences in transcript levels between the two transformants were at least as great as those for the NsrRrepressed genes , making P ydbE a prime candidate for direct activation by NsrR .
Among the two dnaA promoters , transcription from the promoter 1P was specifically enhanced by the in vivo overproduction of IciA protein or using in vitro transcription assays of the dnaA gene .
As for the hdeA and purA promoters , which are repressed by MarA , the rob marbox is also in the “ backward ” orientation .
For example , MarA binds tightly to the marRAB promoter in vitro yet stimulates transcription by only ~ 3 - fold ; no significant binding to inaA can be demonstrated by gel shift experiments , yet transcription is stimulated &gt; 5 - fold .
These results suggest that both GntRbinding sequences , R1 and R2 , are responsible for the repression of gntKU expression , although the affinity of GntR or GntH for R1 seems to be different from that for R2 .
3259 This shows that the NarL protein represses aeg - 46 .
These indicate that DnaA and IciA proteins independently bind to their respective binding sites on the dnaA # 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 19 , 389 – 396392 Y .
We found that Rob ( i ) activates the transcription of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA , ( ii ) requires a 21 - bp soxbox - marbox - robbox sequence to activate zwf transcription , ( iii ) protects the soxbox / marbox / robbox from attack by DNase I , ( iv ) is ambidextrous , i . e . , requires the C - terminal domain of the a subunit of RNA polymerase for activation of zwf but not fumC or micF , ( v ) bends zwf and fumC DNA , and ( vi ) binds zwf and fumC DNA as a monomer .
The binding of NarL or NarP to the nir promoter displaces IHF and overrides the repression of FNR - dependent activation by IHF and Fis ( Browning et al . , 2004 ) .
LysR also mediates Lys repression ( of lysA ) , but in this case it has been suggested that the coeffector ligand is diaminopimelic acid ( which is the substrate for lysA ) and that the latter ’ s binding to LysR converts it into its activator conformation ( 30 , 36 ) .
The artPIQM operon is , besides being downregulated by Lrp ( Hung et al . , 2002 ) , also repressed by ArgR ( Caldara et al . , 2007 ) .
GalR has been shown to regulate ytfQ ( 44 ) ( Fig . S1 in the supplemental material ) .
These results showed that MarA by itself could directly repress purA and hdeA transcription .
The mechanism of transcriptional activation of micF and ompC by OmpR as well as a role of IHF in this activation need to be better understood .
Results are the mean of two independent cultures . © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 52 , 437 – 449Regulation of the chbB promoter 443 represses weakly by itself and strongly in the presence of nagC + , implying that part of the repression by ChbR involves enhancing the binding of NagC to its promoter proximal site .
Recently , a direct regulatory connection between oxidative stress and iron metabolism was shown by Zheng et al . , who demonstrated the transcriptional activation of fur by SoxS and OxyR ( 49 ) .
The effect of cis mutations on Fnr - dependent activation of dmsA - lacZ expression is shown in the lower right portion of the figure . ß - galactosidase activity was measured from the cells containing the indicated fusion inserted in single copy at the att site .
( 2001 ) DNA binding sites for the Mlc and NagC proteins : regulation of nagE , encoding the N - acetylglucosamine specific transporter in Escherichia coli .
A revised model for NarL - dependent activation of nirB gene expression is shown in Fig . 9 .
NarL , activated in the presence of nitrate , modulates the pattern of anaerobic gene expression by inducing further the Fnr - dependent expression of formate dehydrogenase N ( Berg and Stewart , 1990 ) and nitrate reductase ( Stewart , 1982 ; Stewart and Parales , 1988 ) and by repressing the expression of the gene which encodes the fermentative enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase { Kalman and Gunsalus , 1988 ) as well as reductases for alternative electron acceptors , such as dimethylsulphoxide and fumarate ( luchi and Lin , 1987 ; Cotter and Gunsalus , 1989 ) , whose reductions are characterized by tower oxidation - reduction potentials .
An isorepressor , GalS , has also been identified as © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing LtdNagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 147 Fig . 1 .
Similarly , RhaR activates transcription of the rhaSR operon by binding as a dimer to a site that overlaps the RNAP binding site by 4 bp and extends upstream to 82 ( Fig . 1 ) ( 43 ) .
The relative degrees of repression of the ydhY – lacZ fusion in the presence of nitrite ( approximately twofold ) or nitrate ( ~ 13 - fold ) suggest that NarL - mediated inhibition of FNR recruitment is a key component of the regulation of the ydhY – T promoter , and that NarP - mediated inhibition of RNA polymerase binding is partially overcome by the ability of FNR to recruit RNA polymerase .
Considered together , these data show that IHF promotes an interaction between NagC bound to O NC1 and O NC2 , forming a stable nucleoprotein complex that activates fimB expression .
In addition , it was discovered that RpoS activates adhE transcription at both start sites .
The mar promoter is regulated by two independent mechanisms , transcriptional activation , depending on Fis and the MarA / Rob / SoxS activators , and repression due to MarR .
NarL , FNR and Fis can bind to pnir together , but NarL interferes with the binding of IHF To investigate the mechanism by which NarL counteracts IHF - and Fis - mediated repression at pnir , we used gel retardation assays and DNase I footprinting to examine the binding of NarL , FNR , Fis and IHF .
Previous results showing an interaction between RhaS D241 and 70 R599 at rhaBAD ( 4 ) led us to investigate whether an interaction between RhaR D276 and 70 R599 might be required for RhaR activation at rhaSR .
We assayed the plasmid - borne lacZ fusions carrying these mutations to determine whether either of these two CRP sites was required for rhaSR activation .
Another example is the NarL / NarP - and FNR - stimulated expression of nirB and nrf genes , which are repressed by Fis and IHF ( Browning et al . , 2002 ) .
Primer extension and lacZ - operon fusion analyses revealed that gntT has one strong and two weak promoters , all of which are regulated positively by cAMP - CRP and negatively by GntR .
This suggested that the increased melAB expression in the W3133 - 2 mutant could be due to better binding of MelR to site 2 .
This suggests that occupation of the IHF II site increases FNR - dependent activation of pnir .
In our previous work with the tri - alanine scanning library , we also determined that several members of the library reduced SoxS - dependent activation of transcription from the class I fpr promoter , as expected , because the SoxS binding site of class I promoters lies upstream of the 35 hexamer , which is therefore exposed and available for binding by 70 R4 .
When the CaiF protein was overproduced , the pattern of induction of carnitine dehydratase activity was shown to escape from the control of the histone - like protein H - NS and the alternate sigma transcription factor S and to rely primarily on the stimulatory effect of CaiF .
The organization of the putative NarL sites in the dcuB operator - promoter region clearly does not conform to the preferred 7 - 2 - 7 arrangement , which is consistent with the observation that NarL , but not NarP , represses dcuB expression .
Expression of the EmrAB multidrug transport system of E . coli ( Lomovskaya and Lewis , 1992 ) is regulated by repressor EmrR ( Lomovskaya and Lewis , 1995 ) , encoded by the upstream gene and induced by various uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation , salicylic acid and carbonyl cyanide m - chlorophenylhydrazone ( CCCP ) .
Lrp stimulates transcription of lysP by direct binding to its control region .
It should be remembered that nagE encodes the GlcNAc - specific PTS transporter and the genes for two other PTS transporters ( ptsG and manXYZ ) plus the genes for the central components of the PTS ( ptsHIcrr ) have been shown to be regulated by Mlc ( 6 – 11 ) .
Although a similar arrangement of sites around the transcription initiation regions of other genes of the gal regulon might have suggested that they all are regulated by a similar mechanism to galE ( Weickert and Adhya , 1993a , b ; Semsey et al . , 2007 ) , the results presented in this paper demonstrate that repression of the galP gene , is mediated by a distinctly different nucleoprotein complex involving NagC as well as GalR and GalS and including at least 280 bp of DNA .
101 no . 46 16325yjhA encodes an outer membrane channel that can facilitate Neu 5 Ac uptake ( G . Condemine , personal communication ) , and this gene is also repressed strongly by NanR , an effect which is modulated by NagC binding to the NagC1 site .
Although the proximal site , BoxGl , is located at a position typical of prokaryotic activators ( Collado - Vides et al . , 1991 ; Gralla , 1991 ) , it is not sufficient to allow NagC to to activate glmU by itself ; this could be because NagC occupation of this lower affinity site is inadequate in the absence of the higher affinity upstream site .
Both gntT and gntKU are regulated positively by the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein ( CRP ) complex and negatively by GntR ; one GntR - binding element for gntK has been proposed ( 12 , 34 ) , and two GntR - binding elements for gntT were experimentally defined ( 26 ) .
In this study we have shown the negative regulation mechanism of the GntI system by GntR and also by GntH , an activator for the GntII system .
Thus , the left and right half - sites are equivalent in their ability to confer Fnr - dependent activation of dmsA gene expression by RNA polymerase .
Discussion The results described here show that three transcription factors , ChbR , NagC and cAMP / CAP , cooperate in the © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 52 , 437 – 449Regulation of the chbB promoter 445 repression and induction of the chbBCARFG operon in E . coli .
( 2000 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
For instance , Rob has been shown to bind and activate the zwf promoter in vitro but whole cell zwf regulation cannot be activated by Rob , although the gene responds to SoxS and MarA ( Ariza et al . , 1995 ; Jair et al . , 1995 1996a ; b ) .
Therefore , we compared transcription activation by wild - type CRP and RH180 CRP at the wild - type melAB promoter and at the promoter containing the substitution at position ± 75 .
Some of these operons are regulated by the NarL protein alone , such as the narG and frdA operons , whereas expression of the nirB ( encoding NADH - dependent nitrite reductase ) , nrfA and fdnG operons is controlled by both the NarL and NarP proteins .
To verify that Mlc does bind preferentially to the nagE operator in vivo , the effect of plasmids overproducing either Mlc or NagC was tested in a strain mutated for both mlc and nagC . Plasmids expressing either NagC or Mlc produce considerable repression of the nagBE – lacZ looped fusion , reducing expression 88 - and 56 - fold ( Table 2 ) .
Our results show that Fis plays a key role in catabolite repression at the nrf promoter and that its binding overrides the actions of the other regulators .
Such is the path by which OmpF expression is decreased by mar operon - directed increased expression of micF ( 8 ) .
While the basis for this effect is uncertain , it is nevertheless evident that neither NanR nor NagC requires the wild - type segment of D7 DNA in order to be able to activate fimB expression .
Negative regulation of aeg - 46.5 operon expression by the NarL protein In addition to its function as a transcriptional activator , the NarL protein negatively regulates expression of the frdA , dmsA and nrfA operons in response to nitrate availability .
Discussion We showed in earlier work that fimB expression , and hence the OFF - to - ON phase switching of type 1 fimbriation , is activated by NanR and NagC and hence repressed Fig . 9 .
Of the remaining seven SoxS - activated genes , five ( nfo , rimK , tolC , fldB , and mdaA ) were activated with values below threshold while one ( ribA ) appeared slightly repressed .
Fis , an accessorial factor for transcriptional activation of the mar ( multiple antibiotic resistance ) promoter of Escherichia coli in the presence of the activator MarA , SoxS , or Rob .
Interdependence of activation at rhaSR by cyclic AMP receptor protein , the RNA polymerase alpha subunit C - terminal domain and RhaR .
Conclusions In this paper , we have reported an in vitro system for the study of transcription activation of the E . coli melAB promoter by MelR .
For example , the expression of nitrate reductase is stimulated by NarL whilst fumarate reductase is repressed , thus ensuring that nitrate is used as an electron acceptor in preference to fumarate .
The binding of phospho - NarL / NarP displaces IHF from the IHF I site and remodels the architecture of the nir promoter , enabling FNRdependent transcription activation .
In this study , we show that the global transcription factor FNR is a class II activator at the ynfEFGHI promoter and that NarL represses activation by binding to a single target that overlaps the promoter 10 element .
Since we now had evidence that CRP was a direct activator of rhaSR expression , we wished to determine whether AR1 and / or AR2 of CRP were necessary for this activation .
The known SoxS - activated genes are sodA ( encoding Mnsuperoxide dismutase ) , fpr ( NADPH - ferredoxin oxidoreductase ) , micF ( antisense RNA , repressor of OmpF translation ) , ribA ( cyclic GMP hydrolase ) , inaA ( unknown function ) , fldA and fldB ( flavodoxins A and B ) , nfo ( endonuclease IV ) , marRAB ( multiple - antibiotic - resistance operon ) , nfsA ( also called mdaA , a nitroreductase ) , zwf ( glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase ) , fur ( an iron - binding repressor of iron uptake ) , fumC ( fumarase C ) , acnA ( aconitase ) , tolC ( outer membrane protein ) , acrAB ( drug efflux pump ) , and rimK ( a modifier of ribosomal protein S6 ) .
In its description as IciA , ArgP has been reported to regulate dnaA and nrdA transcription ( 20 , 27 – 29 ) .
In vitro binding of Rob to the micF promoter 6,22 , and transcriptional activation of micF in vitro 9 have been demonstrated .
Rob contributes significantly to the expression of the marRAB operon , which regulates the intrinsic resistance of E . coli to various antibiotics , bactericidal agents , and organic solvents ( 5 , 10 , 13 ) .
Thus , although the region of the ydhY – T promoter containing the ” 16 and + 15 heptamers was recognized by NarL in vitro , mutation of these heptamers did not affect NarL - mediated repression in vivo .
Therefore , arafl is essential for both repression and activation and acts as a switch to allow both the repressor and the activator forms of the AraC protein to control the araBAD promoter .
Table 1 shows that two amino acid residues of 70 R4 are required for Rob - dependent activation of fumC and that only one is required for activation of micF .
The – 111 to – 91 site overlaps sequences identified as binding the anaerobic regulators , ArcA and FNR , and the catabolite regulator CRP which have been shown to regulate the acnA P2 promoter ( Cunningham et al . , 1997 ) .
This suggests that IHF binding to ibs has a small inhibitory effect on the ability of NanR to activate fimB expression .
As earlier , with ArgP alone added , all radioactivity was shifted to a sharp band of retarded mobility , indicative of formation of a binary complex that ArgP - mediated regulation of E . coli argO Figure 2 .
These findings suggest that IciA protein may regulate the initiation of chromosomal DNA replication at oriC by controlling expression of the dnaA gene , as well as by inhibiting the initiation of chromosomal DNA replication at oriC .
We reasoned that the difference between the form of MelR unable to activate pmelAB but competent for repression of pmelR and the alternative form that can activate pmelAB but is unable to repress pmelR might be , in part , due to subunitsubunit interactions .
Transcriptional activation by MarA , SoxS and Rob of two tolC promoters using one binding site : a complex promoter configuration for tolC in Escherichia coli .
Model of AraC induction by L - arabinose at the araBAD promoter and relevant sites at the divergent araC promoter .
Although there is no simple rationale for why the yeaR and ogt promoters are also repressed by Fis , we suggest that rapidly growing cells may opt out of certain stress responses , and we speculate that RNS may be a small risk in these conditions compared with other stresses .
IciA protein stimulates RNA polymerase binding to dnaA promoter 1P in the presence of inhibitory amounts of DnaA protein .
We show that the melR promoter is repressed by MelR and that this autoregulation requires MelR binding to Site R .
These results show that the decrease in purA and hdeA expression was caused , directly or indirectly , by transiently synthesized MarA rather than by a stress reaction due to constitutively overabundant MarA .
20 - 22,39 Indeed , changing C5 to any of the other three nucleotides severely reduces SoxS - dependent transcription activation of the fpr and zwf promoters .
The Rob homologs MarA and SoxS can activate transcription of a broad range of genes in vivo ( reviewed in references 2 and 14 ) , including sodA , fumC , micF , zwf , and inaA , suggesting broadly overlapping activities of these three regulators .
Together with a bioinformatic analysis of other Enterobacteriaceae species , these data identify a conserved AraC regulon that includes 7 previously described AraC - regulated genes ( araB , araA , araD , araE , araF , araG , and araH ) as well as three novel targets identified in this work ( ytfQ , araT , and araU ) .
The gntR gene is constitutively expressed , gluconate permease , and a thermoresistant glu - whereas the gntKU genes are positively regulated by the cAMP – CRP complex and negatively by GntR , and gntU expression is further repressed by attenuation , * Corresponding author .
Fis and FNR moderate catabolite repression at the nrf promoter The locations of the different mutations that relieve catabolite repression at the nrf promoter suggest the involvement of Fis , FNR and , possibly , IHF ( Fig . 6 ) .
By analogy with Crp - dependent promoters ( 3 ) and synthetic Fnr - dependent promoters ( 29 , 30 ) , we hypothesized that the mechanism by which napF expression is activated by Fnr is distinct from the mechanism involved in the activation of most4194 DARWIN ET AL . J .
This protein , engineered to facilitate purification and hereafter referred to as MarA , had been shown previously to activate nfnB transcription in vitro ( 20 ) .
The results in this report also demonstrate that gntT is regulated by the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein ( CRP ) complex , which was found be essential for full induction .
While NarL was still able to activate and to repress nrfA gene expression , the pattern differed from the wild - type nrfA - lacZ reporter fusion ( Fig . 6B ) .
For the nirBDC and nrfABCDEFG operons , Fnr protein , bound near position 41.5 , activates transcription maximally only when phospho - NarL or - NarP protein is bound further upstream to block inhibition by other proteins ( 2 , 8 , 59 ) .
Microarray analysis revealed that NsrR represses nine operons encoding 20 genes in Escherichia coli MG1655 , including the hmpA , ytfE , and ygbA genes that were previously shown to be regulated by NsrR .
DNA sequence inspection and previous results indicating that RhaS was required for activation of rhaT expression ( 40 ) suggested that RhaS binds to DNA at the rhaT promoter , but direct evidence of RhaS protein binding to rhaT promoter DNA had not been obtained .
NanR and NagC activate fimB expression by binding to operator sequences ( O NR and O NC1 respectively ; Fig . 1 ) situated further upstream of the regulated promoter than is usual in bacteria .
Since ArgP is required for transcription of the Arg exporter ArgO , we also tested the promoters of other genes known to be involved in Arg transport ( artP , artJ , argT , and the hisJQMP operon ) as candidates for regulation by ArgP .
However , it is possible that the closely related YjgS protein , which is 46 % identical to GntR , is involved in the positive regulation of gntT .
It is possible that NarP and Fnr may activate napF transcription synergistically whereas Fnr and NarL cannot , as discussed below .
As the DNA binding site for FNR overlaps the acsP1 - 35 element , it is easy to understand how FNR represses acsP1 at the same time as it activates the nrf promoter .
NarX and / or NarQ sensors , both NarL and NarP are phosphorylated where either response regulator can then activate nrfA gene expression .
marA locus causes decreased expression of OmpF porin in multiple - antibiotic - resistant ( Mar ) mutants of Escherichia coli .
Finally , either NarL or NarP was able to activate nrfA - lacZ expression independently of the other , while only NarL could repress expression .
Dong X , Li S , DeMoss J : Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
Only one NagC operator has been identified as important for repression at galP .
Pellegrini Molecular Microbiology ( 2004 ) 52 ( 2 ) , 437 – 449 doi : 10.1111 / j . 1365 - 2958.2004.03986 . x Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP Jacqueline Plumbridge * and Olivier Pellegrini Institut de Biologie Physico - Chimique ( CNRS UPR9073 ) , 13 , rue Pierre et Marie Curie , 75005 Paris , France .
Whatever the mechanism for this apparent reduction in mar transcription by Fis , it cannot be the result of the specific repression of the mar operon , since the same reduction is observed whether or not the promoter is capable of binding Fis .
However the much stronger repression of this fusion by overproduced Mlc , compared with overproduced NagC , shows that the isolated nagE operator site has a higher affinity for Mlc than NagC .
It has been shown that the three proteins ChbR , CRP and NagC regulate the expression of the chb operon .
First , when we replaced the knockout with a wild - type metJ gene expressed from a plasmid , thus increasing gene copy number , transcript and presumably repressor protein concentrations , there was a remarkable increase in the ability of MetJ to repress the metE locus .
IHF bound to the IHF II site activates FNR - dependent transcription Previously , we demonstrated that IHF binding to the IHF I site represses FNR - dependent transcription at pnir ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Browning et al . , 2000 ) .
36 , No . 8 2667 – 2676 doi : 10.1093 / nar / gkn119 Autoregulation of the Escherichia coli melR promoter : repression involves four molecules of MelR Shivanthi Samarasinghe 1 , Mohamed Samir El - Robh 1 , David C .
GntR thus seems to function as Inhibition of gluconate uptake by alternative sugars in Hfr G6MD2 a negative regulator of gntT by binding to the putative harboring pGNTTK sequence ( see below ) .
This suggests that at the complex fucPIK promoter , any interactions between CRP and the - CTD do not contribute significantly to promoter activation .
For exampie , whiist NarL is responsibie for maximum induction of nitrate reductase during anaerobic growth in the presence of nitrate , FNR - dependent expression of fumarate reductase is repressed by NarL , Thus , NarL ensures that nitrate , rather than energeticaily less rewarding substrates , is used as a terminal electron acceptor ( reviewed by iuchiandLin , 1991 ) .
Miller et al . ( 28 ) have found that SoxS activates mar transcription in vivo , and we have recently found a marbox sequence in the promoter region upstream of marRAB which binds MarA and enables either purified MalE - SoxS or MarA to activate transcription of marRAB in vitro ( 18 , 26 ) .
For example , the galETK operon is regulated by three factors GalR , CAP and the nucleoid - associated protein HU .
This suggests that CRP site 3 is responsible for at least part of the CRP activation of rhaSR expression .
Characterization of OmpR binding sequences in the upstream region of the ompF promoter essential for transcriptional activation .
The results demonstrate that stimulation of the inaA promoter by MarA and SoxS in vivo requires only sequences from - 51 to + 3 ( data not shown ) .
MelR activates expression of the melA and melB genes , encoding an a - galactosidase and a melibiose permease , respectively .
Here , it is shown that the product of the argP gene , the ArgP protein , is a modulator molecule that regulates the expression of the arginine transport system .
However , CRP is able to activate transcription from the melAB promoter with RNAP containing both fulllength and truncated a subunits .
Interestingly , AraC - dependent transcription initiation at the araBAD promoter is increased by the cyclic AMP receptor protein ( CRP ) , a well - characterized global regulator , controlled by cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) , that activates the expression of a number of genes in response to a variety of stresses , including glucose starvation ( reviewed by Kolb et al . , 1993 ) .
( ii ) Relief of the repression by the narL mutation indicated that the gene product , which activated the narC operon ( 36 ) , was also required for repression of thefrd operon .
( 2004 ) Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP .
Thus , the single chromosomal copy of metJ in JJ100 produces enough product to cause about a 35 - fold repression of the multiple , plasmid - borne metB promoters .
From these results , we conclude that the IciA I site is essential and alone sufficient for the activation of transcription from the dnaA promoter 1P by IciA protein .
( 1995 ) Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
As at the yeaR promoter , nitrate - dependent induction can be repressed by Fis that binds to a single site overlapping the upstream DNA site for NarL .
MarA activates the expression of diverse genes , including acrAB , micF , mlr - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 , slp , and inaA , which endow cells with resistance ( 3 ) .
Together with the present results , this suggests a simple model ( illustrated in Fig . 6 ) to explain how MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter is modulated by the elements at the upstream melAB promoter .
Indeed , the effect of the mutation in OE5 was similar to © 2008 The Authors Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 71 , 146 – 157NagC , GalR and GalS repression at galP 153 that in the weakly binding OE2 and OE3 sites ( a mutation in OE4 has not yet been tested ) .
Based on these four sites , the . known start point for araBAD transcription at + 1 ( 6 ) , and an estimated start point for araC transcription near - 170 , Ogden et aL proposed ( i ) that araBAD and araC are stimulated by the . binding of CAP to distinct regions on the ' DNA - CRPBAD and CRPC , respectively , and ( ii ) that the araO , when bound to araC protein , prevents the binding of CAP to either CRPc or CRPBAD , and this in turn de - B756 Biochemistry : Lee et aL Proc .
The melR promoter and its repression by MelR .
Production of OmpF and LamB was regulated negatively by MarA also in MC4100 .
Also , IciA protein binds to two sites , IciA I and IciA II , in the dnaA promoter region ( 25 ) .
Thus the role of CAP is to act in concert with ChbR to activate expression of the chb operon .
BACTERIOL . present study , we identified four amino acid residues in 70 , K593 , L595 , R599 , and R608 , which were important for RhaRmediated transcription activation of rhaSR ( Fig . 2B ) .
A melAB promoter fragment that is very weakly activated by the meiR gene product has been made by creating multiple symmetrical changes in both MelR - binding sites .
An additional 50 - fold activation of rhaBAD expression occurs when CRP occupies its binding site centered at 92.5 , which places CRP adjacent to RhaS ( 9 ) .
Introduction The expression of respiratory nitrate reductase in Escherichia cotiis regulated at the level of transcription by two pleiotropic rrans - acting factors , Fnr and NarL ( Stewart , 1982 ) .
We surmise , from the distance of this marbox ( centered at - 61.5 ) to the putative - 35 transcriptional signal ( 17 , 18 ) , that activation of mar by MarA requires interaction with the carboxy - terminal domain of the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase , i . e . , that MarA is a class I activator ( 16 ) of mar as it is for zwf .
Thus , when MelR - binding Site 2 is altered in the KK81 fragment , the pattern of MelRdependent repression of the melR promoter is similar to that seen with the shorter KK101 fragment ( Fig . 4 ) .
By replacing the 274 bp of wild - type DNA from - 467 to - 194 with heterologous sequences it was shown that neither NanR nor NagC requires this segment of DNA in order to activate fimB expression .
In vitro transcription of the dnaA gene was inhibited by DnaA protein ( 15 ) .
Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
Our results suggest that repression by NarL at the ynfE promoter may be unusual and might be due to locking of the FNR - RNAP - promoterVOL .
Model for MelR and CRP binding during activation at the melAB promoter .
The TolC level was regulated positively by MarA , Rob , or SoxS .
( 2000 ) Repression of the Escherichia coli melR promoter by MelR : evidence that efficient repression requires the formation of a repression loop .
It thus seems likely that the ability of IHF alone to activate fimB expression is enhanced in the D3 mutant background .
Also , both half - sites of the Fnr recognition sequence at dmsA are required for Fnrdependent expression and are similar in their ability to activate dmsA transcription .
This demonstrated that either NarL or NarP is required to activate transcription from the hcp promoter .
Thus far , only the MarA / SoxS / Rob - binding site within the mar promoter has been identified and shown to be responsible for activation by all three transcription factors ( 17 ) .
During the course of our studies on CRP activation of the rhaBAD operon , we compared expression from various rhaBAD promoter fusions ( Fig . 1 ) in crp and crp strain backgrounds .
We suppose that this improvement in MelR binding is responsible for the increased melAB promoter activity in the W3133 - 2 mutant , although we cannot prove that it is solely responsible .
In addition , the repression of chiP translation by ChiX induces premature Rho - dependent transcription termination within the chiP gene , preventing expression of the chiQ gene ( encoding a putative lipoprotein of unknown function ) located immediately downstream of chiP and normally cotranscribed with the latter ( Bossi et al . , 2012 ) .
Identification of the DNA - binding domain of the OmpR protein required for transcriptional activation of the ompF and ompC genes of Escherichia coli by in vivo DNA footprinting .
The repression of the manXYZ operon by a plasmid expressing NagC is in agreement with the original observations of Vogler and Lengeler ( 1989 ) .
In a control experiment , the activity of the Fnr ( D154A ) protein was confirmed by its ability to activate transcription of the Fnr - dependent dmsA promoter in vitro ( data not shown ) .
Sufficiency of Rob for in vitro transcriptional activation of zwf , fpr , fumC , micF , nfo , and sodA , promoters known to be activated by MalE - SoxS and MarA .
At the time that these experiments were done , the genes known to be ArgP regulated in vivo included the following ( gene functions are indicated in parentheses ) : argO ( Arg export ) , dapB ( dihydrodipicolinate reductase in the diaminopimelate - Lys biosynthetic pathway ) , and K . pneumoniae gdhA ( glutamate dehydrogenase for NH 4 assimilation and glutamate biosynthesis ) .
Dual regulation of inaA by the multiple antibiotic resistance ( Mar ) and superoxide ( SoxRS ) stress response systems in Escherichia coli .
Discussion In the previous study , we found the cross - regulation between GntI and GntII systems through GntH as a positive regulator for the GntII genes , which negatively controls the expression of GntI genes [ Tsunedomi et al . , 2003 ] .
Thus , NanR and NagC appear to activate fimB expression independently .
Peeters et al . have recently demonstrated that argP expression was not regulated by Lrp ( 35 ) .
fimE is regulated by the fim invertible element , and hence , like the Pap adhesin regulators PapB and PapI , both of the fim regulatory proteins are probably controlled by phase variation as well ( 48 , 49 ) .
The binding of Fis and IHF inhibits FNRdependent transcription at the nir promoter ( – ve ) .
The microarray data for the other promoters that are apparently activated by NsrR must be evaluated cautiously , however , because few of these transcripts encode proteins known or suspected to be involved in the response to RNS , and most of the differences were much smaller ( typically two - to threefold apparent activation ) than the 30 - fold repression of ytfE , the 14 - fold repression of hmpA , and the up - to - 15 - fold repression of hcp .
Significant primary sequence homology between GntR and GntH , especially in their HTH motifs for DNA binding , led us to hypothesize that GntH , an activator for the GntII genes , represses the GntI genes via GntR - binding elements .
However , placing the NanR , IHF and NagC binding sites closer to the fimB promoter enhances the ability of the regulators to activate fimB expression .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
Activation by Lrp interferes with the previously demonstrated activation of the argO promoter by ArgP .
At low to intermediate levels of nitrate ( 2 to 6 mM ) NarP appeared to antagonize the ability of NarL to activate fdnG operon expression .
In this report , we determined the cis - element responsible for the IciA - dependent activation of the dnaA promoter 1P and the binding mode of IciA protein to the IciA I site .
To investigate the role of GntR in repression of the gntT gene , the expression of a single - copy chromosomal gntT : : lacZ fusion was measured in a gntR mutant .
The NarL / NarP protein binding sites required for activation of the nirB and nrfA operons are located further upstream ( 69.5 and 74.5 , respectively ) than that of the aeg - 46.5 operon ( 44.5 ) .
Thus , the mar operon has the remarkable property that its first gene product , MarR , represses its transcription whereas the second gene product , MarA , stimulates its transcription .
The results shown in Fig . 4 indicate that , with the shorter KK101 fragment , repression of the melR promoter by MelR differs from the repression found with the longer KK81 fragment .
Expression of the FNR - dependent nitrate regulon is further activated by NarL binding to an upstream site , situated 70 - 200 bp upstream of the transcription start site , depending upon the promoter ( reviewed in Stewart , 1993 ) .
First , repression of nanC and fimB divergent transcripts by NagC has been observed both in vivo and in vitro [ 32 ] .
ß - Galactosidase activity Promoter Mutated site minus NO 3 plus NO 3 Fold induction ogt100 93 + 1 439 + 12 4.7 ogt102 NarL I 92 + 5 107 + 6 1.2 ogt104 NarL II 56 + 2 87 + 3 1.6 the yeaR promoter is repressed by the binding of NsrR to a target that overlaps the 10 hexamer element ( Figure 1A ) [ 12,31,32 ] .
Melville and Gunsalus ( 1996 ) reported that the hemA gene , which is also repressed by FNR , contains only one half - site of FNR consensus sequence .
Although the role of CAP in repression of nagE – B is likely to be purely architectural , it is clear that a major part of the CAP activation of nagE is due to protein – protein contacts between CAP and RNA polymerase .
To explore the origin of the indirect effect , we tested whether CRP was involved in regulation of rhaSR expression .
Similarly , the homologous NarL and NarP proteins of the nitrate regulon bind to the same sites but regulate differentially ( Darwin et al . , 1997 ) .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
With the exception of xylA , the last AraC - regulated gene to be identified was araJ , more than 30 years ago ( 27 ) .
Results illustrated in Figure 5B show that the MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter in the TB210 fragment is unchanged in the TB211 and TB222 derivatives .
In vitro studies of MelR binding at the melR promoter Our results show that MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter is contingent on MelR binding to site R and is somehow modulated by MelR binding to upstream sites 2 , 1 and 1 0 .
We favor the idea that the repression of gntT is the result of DNA looping through interaction between the two GntR molecules as shown for many other operons in E . coli , such as the ara , gal , lac , and deo operons ( 29 ) .
In experiments using native nag DNA , both sites are of DNA looping was reinforced by the strict phasing requirement of the AraC binding sites for repression of the araBAD operon ( Dunn et al . , 1984 ; Lee &amp; Schleif , 1989 ) .
DnaA and IciA proteins also independently bound to their binding sites in oriC ( Hwang and Kornberg , 1992b ) .
In a strain with a wild - type chromosomal marRAB operon , Rob activates the promoter , and therefore the rob + mar + strain produces more MarR repressor than the rob mar + strain .
We previously showed that MelR - dependent activation of pmelAB could be readily monitored using the low - copy - number , broadhost - range lac fusion plasmid pRW50 , carrying the KK43 pmelAB promoter fragment ( KK43 - pRW50 ) ( 2 ) .
Oxidative stress genes that are transcriptionally activated by both the marRAB and soxRS systems include sodA ( encoding a superoxide dismutase ) , zwf ( encoding glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase [ G6PD ] ) , fumC ( encoding a heat - stable fumarase ) , soi - 17 / - 19 , and the genes encoding two other oxidative stress proteins of unknown function ( 4 , 17 , 18 , 26 , 28 ) .
Presumably , uninduced levels of MarA and / or SoxS mediate a low - level induction of the inaA gene ; the lower basal level of inaA expression in Dmar strains was noted earlier ( Rosner and Slonczewski , 1994 ) .
The phospho - DcuR protein is known to activate the transcription of three operons : the dcuB - fumB operon encoding the DcuB carrier and fumarase B , the frd - ABCD operon encoding fumarate reductase ( Fig . 1C ) , and the dctA gene encoding the aerobic C 4 - dicarboxylate transporter ( 2 , 17 , 18 , 67 ) .
Thus , activation of fimB expression by NanR , as judged by the effect of mutations in nanR , orin its operator sequence ( O NR ) , is enhanced considerably in the D3 deletion mutant .
Results in Figure 3C show that Val273 MelR gives a small enhancement in repression of the melR promoter carrying the 13T substitution in site R , B .
( 2004 ) Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP .
Optimal expression of the melAB promoter requires Sites 1 0 , Site 1 , Site 2 and Site 2 0 ; CRP acts as a ` bridge ' between MelR bound at Sites 1 0 and 1 and at Sites 2 and 2 0 , increasing expression from the melAB promoter .
The H - NS protein modulates the activation of the ilvIH operon of Escherichia coli K12 by Lrp , the leucine regulatory protein .
Plasmid pJW15 was used to supply MelR to activate expression of the pmelAB : : lac fusion carried by KK43 - pRW50 .
Discussion Full repression of the lac operon requires both 02 and 03 Kania and Muller - Hill ( 1977 ) concluded from studies with a Lac repressor - fl - galactosidase chimera that two repressor subunits are sufficient for operator binding and that therefore tetrameric Lac repressor must be able to bind two lac operator sequences at the same time .
This is likely due to the greater extent of activation by SoxS of promoters involved in superoxide defense , e . g . , acnA , fpr , zwf , fumC , and sodA .
However , the napF control region has a very different architecture , with an Fnr - binding site centered at position 64.5 and activation by NarP being mediated by a binding site downstream , at position 44.5 ( Fig . 1 ) .
Thus , it seems that Fnr can regulate adhE expression from the downstream transcriptional start site only in the physical absence of the upstream region .
The NarL and NarP proteins are each able to activate expression of the nirB and nrfA operons by interaction with common DNA - binding sites .
Given that the activation by full - length , chromosomally expressed RhaS at rhaBAD is approximately 33 - fold higher than that of chromosomally expressed RhaR at rhaSR , comparable efficiencies of activation by the CTDs to their full - length counterparts would have resulted in His 6 - RhaR - CTD activating rhaSR by approximately 30 - fold .
The location of the AraC binding site upstream of ytfQ is too far upstream of the transcription start site to repress transcription by directly occluding RNAP .
Thus , although Fis and IHF repress FNR - dependent activation of pnir , they do not prevent FNR binding .
The physiological function of the GutM protein is shown to be activation of gut operon transcription , while that it involves participation of both a glucitol - Gxpressional regulation of the operon is unusual in that it invokes participation of both a glucitolspecific repressor and a glucitol - specific activator in addition to the general activator , the cAMP - CRP complex .
JOHNSON AND ROBERT F . SCHLEIF * Department of Biology , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , Maryland 21218 Received 20 September 1999 / Accepted 12 January 2000 Full activation of transcription of the araFGH promoter , p FGH , requires both the catabolite activator protein ( CAP ) and AraC protein .
Although not tested directly , the ybjC - mdaA operon may contain a third gene , rimK , as : ( i ) there does not appear to be either an RNA chain termination signal nor a promoter between mdaA and rimK ( they are separated by 172 bp ) ; ( ii ) Barbosa and Levy ( Barbosa and Levy 2000 ) observed the induction of rimK in their microarray analysis for MarA - induced genes ; and ( iii ) the nearest potential MarA binding site upstream of rimK is that identified for ybjC .
Transcription of nfnB is greatly increased by induced or constitutive chromosomal expression of MarA but is unaltered by constitutive expression of chromosomal SoxS and Rob .
The most intensely examined operon is araBAD , where AraC is required for repression and activation of BAD transcription ( reviewed by Schleif , 1992 ) .
The plasmid - encoded urease gene cluster of the family Enterobacteriaceae is positively regulated by UreR , a member of the AraC family of transcriptional activators .
Hence , in this work , we used in vivo and in vitro methods to investigate the determinants needed for MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter .
The first gene of the emrRAB operon encodes transcription factor EmrR that represses transcription of this operon .
To identify specific residues in - CTD that are involved in rhaSR activation , we assayed an - CTD plasmid library with independent alanine substitutions at each residue in - CTD ( 10 , 30 ) at the ( rhaS - lacZ ) 216 promoter fusion ( Fig . 3 ) .
Since only the NarP protein can activate aeg - 46.5 operon expression ( again , presumably by interacting with RNA polymerase ) , the competition from NarL for the binding sites would lead to an antagonization of NarP activation .
This component of CRP activation at rhaSR could account for the majority of the CRP activation in a wild - type context and may involve a mechanism , such as DNA bending , that can act from a distance .
We found that CRP alone was not capable of activating rhaBAD expression , similar to previous findings in vivo , and that His 6 - RhaS - CTD alone substantially activated rhaBAD expression ( Fig . 6 ) .
One of the more striking points in each model is that the NarP protein is nonessential ( i . e . , not a major player ) and that it can function as an antagonist of NarL in its ability to activate nirB or nrfA operon expression .
For these reasons , we believe that NarL and NarP activate expression at pnrfA by a similar mechanism to that at pnirB , i . e . by counteracting the effects of repressive factors .
NagC represses nagE , encoding the N - acetylglucosamine - specific transporter , while Mlc represses three PTS operons , ptsG , manXYZ and ptsHIcrr , involved in the uptake of glucose .
As hmpA and ytfE encode a nitric oxide reductase and a mechanism to repair iron - sulfur centers damaged by nitric oxide , the demonstration that hcp - hcr , hmpA , and ytfE are the three transcripts most tightly regulated by NsrR highlights the possibility that the hybrid cluster protein , HCP , might also be part of a defense mechanism against reactive nitrogen stress .
Activation of chbBCA expression by ChbR is essential to relieve ChiX repression of chiP .
Mutational analysis of the nirB and nrfA operon control regions has identified cis - acting regions that are required for both NarL and NarP - dependent induction ( Tyson et al . , 1994 ) .
In the second point , there is also an example that AraC positively and negatively regulates the araBAD operon , the mechanism of which might be similar to some extent to that of the GntII regulation .
However , in the presence of MarA the rob transcript levels decreased over time , but as expected the levels of the gnd transcript ( the control ) remained unaffected ( Fig . 6C ) .
We show that the mutant CRP constitutively activates transcription from both the IS5 - disrupted and the wild - type fucPIK promoters , and we identify the CRP - binding site that is required for this activity .
Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : interactions of MelR with its DNA target site and with domain 4 of the RNA polymerase sigma subunit .
The activator of GntII genes for gluconate metabolism , GntH , exerts negative control of GntR - regulated GntI genes in Escherichia coli .
These results confirm that regulation of the gntT gene by GntR is similar to other negatively regulated systems .
Moreover , a common inverted repeat sequence coincided with the defined here NsrR recognition motif was shown to be involved in NsrR - mediated repression of the ytfE gene .
The average repression ratio was 0.44 for purA ( see Fig . 5 , WT ) and 0.60 for hdeA ( see Fig . 6 , WT ) relative to controls without MarA .
Subsequent to rhaSR expression , RhaS binds DNA upstream of rhaBAD at 32 to 81 relative to the transcription start site to increase rhaBAD expression by approximately 1,000 - fold ( to 10 Miller units in single copy ) .
NarL - mediated repression of the frdA promoter is achieved by NarL binding over a large region centred near the transcription start site and including the FNR site ( Li et al . , 1994 ) .
To address the mechanisms of activation by CRP and the RNA polymerase - subunit C - terminal domain ( - CTD ) at rhaSR , we tested the effects of alanine substitutions in CRP activating regions 1 and 2 , overexpression of a truncated version of ( - 235 ) , and alanine substitutions throughout - CTD .
Although most NarLdependent promoters are also co - dependent on a second transcription factor , FNR protein , two targets , the yeaR and ogt promoters , are activated by NarL alone with no involvement of FNR .
CRP / cAMP and CytR regulated promoters in Escherichia coli K12 : the cdd promoter .
2 When the two dnaA promoters were repressed by DnaA protein , IciA protein was able to restore transcription from the 1P promoter with little effect on transcription from the 2P promoter ( 25 ) .
As expected , the introduction of the p99G and p146A substitutions derepressed expression from the wild - type promoter , confirming that IHF and Fis binding to the IHF I and Fis I sites represses pnir .
Furthermore , we have demonstrated that Lrp - mediated activation of P argO is also operative , and even more efficient , in an argP deletion mutant ( see below ) .
Results illustrated in Figure 6B show that MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter in the TB28 fragment is reduced .
c The Authors Journal compilation c 2009 Biochemical SocietyTranscription activation by Escherichia coli NarL protein 251 Figure 1 NarL regulates the E . coli yeaR promoter ( A ) This Figure shows the E . coli K - 12 yeaR promoter sequence from positions 64 to + 86 with respect to the transcription start site ( + 1 ) ( 12 ) .
Hence , polB regulation by AraC may be widely conserved .
( 1999 ) Lrp binds to two regions in the dadAX promoter region of Escherichia coli to repress and activate transcription directly .
The mutation CAP + 6 puts the CAP site at a non - functional distance for nagE ( – 67.5 ) , while the CAP – 6 mutation puts the CAP site at – 65.5 for nagB , also expected to be non - functional for cAMP / CAP activation ( 37,38 ) .
Summary Expression from the Escherichia coli nrfA promoter ( pnrfA ) is activated by both the FNR protein ( an anaerobically triggered transcription activator ) and the NarL or NarP proteins ( transcription activators triggered by nitrite and nitrate ) .
We show here that MarA directly mediates upregulation of nfnB expression through a cis - recognition marbox element in the nfnB promoter .
Thus , activation by Fis is dependent on the presence of MarA or Rob ( or induced levels of SoxS ; see below ) .
Despite overlapping regulation by SoxS , MarA , and Rob , the three systems exhibit differential control in terms of both the strength of their effects on individual genes and activation of some promoters uniquely ( e . g . , zwf by SoxS or MarA but not by Rob ) .
It accepts a methyl group from methylphosphotriesters and then acts as a transcriptional activator of the ada operon AdiY Escherichia coli SP : P33234 Transcriptional activator of the adiA gene for 253 32 , 237 biodegradative acid - induced arginine decarboxylase AfrR Escherichia coli TE : Q07681 Probable transcriptional activator of the 272 258 afrABRS operon for expression of AF / R1 fimbria in E . coli RDEC - 1 , a rabbit pathogen AggR Escherichia coli SP : P43464 Transcriptional activator of the aggA gene for 265 183 aggregative adherence fimbria I ( AAF / I ) expression in enteroaggregative E . coli strains AppY Escherichia coli SP : P05052 Transcriptional activator of the cyxAB , hyaAB - 243 12 , 131 CDEF and appA operons during the deceleration phase of growth AraC Citrobacter freundii SP : P11765 Regulator of several operons involved in the 281 30 transport and catabolism of L - arabinose ( similar to E . coli AraC ) AraC Escherichia coli SP : P03021 Activator of the expression of the araBAD , 292 174 , 238 , 248 , 266 araFGH and araE operons , which are involved in the transport and catabolism of L - arabinose .
Upstream sequence elements required for NarL - mediated activation of transcription from the narGHJI promoter of Escherichia coli .
Transposon mutagenesis experiments aimed at defining the Rob regulon revealed eight Rob - regulated targets , namely inaA , marRAB , aslB , ybaO , mdlA , yfhD , ybiS , and galT ( 10 ) , some of which are also known members of the mar and sox regulons ( 11 ) .
Although marbox 1 and marbox 4 were closely related to the degenerate consensus sequence ( 3 nt differences out of 14 specified nt ) ( Fig . 3B ) , their location , downstream from the - 10 hexamer and 83 nt upstream from the - 35 hexamer , respectively , suggested that these marboxes were probably not functional in the MarA activation of nfnB .
These observations indicate that the region that is essential for normal Fnr - dependent induction of aeg - 46.5 operon expression is located downstream of position 85 .
This indicates that ( i ) the 70 NarL heptamer site is essential for NarL to function as an activator of nrfA expression and that ( ii ) other sites are used for NarL to repress expression independently of the 70 site , in contrast to prior interpretations ( see Discussion ) .
Many Cel + strains carry mutations in nagC The NagC repressor that regulates the nag operon involved in N - acetylglucosamine metabolism was also shown to regulate the chb operon ( Plumbridge and Pellegrini , 2004 ) .
However , the hybrid mac promoters , containing only part of the lac promoter and the first lac operator , are just - 5 - fold repressed by Lac repressor ( Vidal - Ingigliari and Raibaud , 1985 ) .
( 1987 ) Transcriptional repression of the dnaA gene of Escherichia coli by DnaA protein .
The marR gene encodes a repressor protein that binds to marO and represses transcription of marRAB .
The resulting recombinant plasmids were used to monitor MelR - dependent activation at the melAB promoter ; i . e . transcripts initiating at the melAB promoter run to the oop terminator and give discrete transcripts that are easy to detect by gel electrophoresis .
To calculate the percentages of the various structures , we used the following information : ( i ) the wild - type lac operon is 1300 - fold repressed ; ( ii ) a lac operon in which 02 and 03 are destroyed is 18 - fold repressed , ( iii ) a lac operon in which O1 is destroyed is 2 - fold repressed , ( iv ) 02 and 03 have a 20 - and 100 - fold lower affinity for Lac repressor than O1 in vitro and ( v ) lac transcription is 50 - fold activated by CAP .
Although there are many moderate to weak matches to the consensus CRP - binding site sequence in the rhaSR - rhaBAD intergenic region , three of these , sites 2 through 4 , seemed most likely to directly influence rhaSR activation .
This is in contrast to the requirement for the left half - site of the Fnr1 regulatory site needed for Fnr - dependent repression at the cydA P1 promoter [ 15 ] .
nanC expression is also activated by the regulators cyclic AMP - catabolite activator protein , OmpR , and CpxR .
The three metD genes are regulated by the MetJ repressor .
Repression of the melR promoter carried on different KK81 fragments . The figure shows the degree of MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter carried on the starting KK81 fragment and the mutant derivatives , S2 ± S5 .
Since RbsR influences transcription of the udk and dcd operons , RsbR may also be involved in the regulation of salvage pathway of pyrimidine nucleotides .
NarP thus performs a unique role to fine - tune fdnG operon expression by delaying the ability of NarL to activate when nitrate levels are low .
In the second part of the present study , we selected another E . coli promoter , the ogt promoter , that transcriptome analysis [ 11 ] had predicted to be activated by NarL alone , and we have used biochemical and genetic analysis to compare its expression and organization with the yeaR promoter .
Thus , the dcuSR operon control region contains an authenticated 7 - 2 - 7 heptamer pair for phospho - NarL binding overlapping the likely 35 region of the promoter ( Fig . 2B ) and therefore positioned appropriately to effect the observed repression ( Table 2 ) .
CRP binding upstream of the E . coli malK promoter repositions three molecules of MalT on the DNA such that they are able to activate transcription ( Richet et al . , 1991 ) .
We show in this work that yjhA is indeed regulated by NanR and several other regulators and that it encodes a Neu5Ac - specific channel .
RhaR activates transcription of rhaSR , and RhaS activates transcription of the operon that encodes the L - rhamnose catabolic enzymes , rhaBAD , as well as the operon that encodes the L - rhamnose transport protein , rhaT .
Previously , overexpression of Rob was shown to induce multiple antibiotic and superoxide resistance phenotypes ( 3 ) , to activate expression of fumC , inaA , and sodA in vivo ( 3 ) , and to activate the transcription of six mar / soxRS regulon promoters in vitro by mechanisms that are strikingly similar to that of MarA and SoxS ( 22 ) .
Mutagenesis of the Fnr recognition sequence at the dmsA promoter region confirmed the contribution of Fnr in the 100 - fold activation of dmsABC expression and explored the DNA sequence and spacing requirements for the Fnr recognition site at the P1 promoter .
However , narG and frdA operon expression is regulated by the NarL protein alone ( Rabin &amp; Stewart , 1993 ) , suggesting that the NarL binding sites in these control regions are not efficiently recognized by the NarP protein .
To determine whether site II is essential for repression by MarR , marO133 , a mutant deleted for the 20 bp immediately preceding marR ( pos . 1425 - 1444 ) but wild - type for marRAB ( unpublished data ) , was studied .
174 , No . 15 Localization of Upstream Sequence Elements Required for Nitrate and Anaerobic Induction of fdn ( Formate Dehydrogenase - N ) Operon Expression in Escherichia coli K - 12 JING LI ' AND VALLEY STEWART ' 2 * Sections of Microbiology ' and Genetics &amp; Development , 2 Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 - 8101 Received 25 March 1992 / Accepted 19 May 1992 Two transcriptional activators , the FNR and NARL proteins , are required for induction of the fdnGHI operon , encoding Escherichia coli formate dehydrogenase - N .
Repression by NagC and ChbR in vivo A plasmid overexpressing ChbR produces very strong repression of the chbB – lacZ fusion in a wild - type strain ( 37 - fold ) , whereas a plasmid overexpressing NagC produces less than twofold repression ( Table 5 ) .
( 2000 ) Suppression of FNR - dependent transcription activation at the Escherichia coli nir promoter by Fis , IHF and H - NS : modulation of transcription by a complex nucleo - protein assembly .
Identification of the DNAbinding domain of the OmpR protein required for transcriptional activation of the ompF and ompC genes of Escherichia coli by in vivo DNA footprinting .
The treB treC operon is negatively regulated by TreR , whose gene treR is located upstream of treB but is not part of the operon .
The role of different MelR sites in activation of the melAB promoter The above footprinting experiments suggest that five MelR molecules can bind upstream of the melAB transcript start Fig . 6 .
Transient repressor effect of Fis on the growth phase - regulated osmE promoter of Escherichia coli K12 .
Note that the magnitude of the effect of CRP on activation of the melAB promoter in the in vitro transcription experiment ( Fig . 2B ) is less than might have been expected from the footprinting and in vivo experiments ( Fig . 4 and Table 1 ) .
NorR is a r 54 - dependent transcriptional activator that regulates expression of the NO reductase operons , norVW in E . coli and norAB in R . eutropha [ 21,22 ] .
The expression of ptsG is controlled by Mlc binding to two operators upstream of two promoters , both of which are subject to Mlc repression .
It is interesting to speculate that this is the element responsible for binding GntR and repression of gntKU expression .
The CRP site required for full activation at rhaSR is located upstream but not adjacent to the RhaR binding site and is centered at 111.5 ( Fig . 1 ) ( 17 ) .
Lrp was also found to be involved in the regulation of cadBA expression .
Substitutions within CRP that affect transcription activation at the melAB promoter To identify the residues of CRP that are important in transcription activation at the melAB promoter , a library of randomly mutated crp genes was created using error - prone PCR .
For example , nitrate induction of the narGHJI operon ( 21 ) and the narK gene ( 12 ) is controlled exclusively by NarL , while induction of the fdnGHI operon is controlled principally by NarL , but NarP also effects a degree of control ( observed with a narL mutant ) ( 21 ) .
We suggest that NarL interferes with IHF binding at the nir promoter by distorting the minor groove at its target site , and we argue that the resulting activation by NarL results from remodelling of the local nucleoprotein structure to facilitate FNR - dependent transcription .
The metBL and metF genes each had a single transcript which was repressed by metj , while the metJ gene had three transcripts , of which the first was strongly repressed by metj , the second was less strongly repressed , and the third was not repressed .
In practice , considerable similarity between the regulatory protein and the regulated protein is only seen in the regulatory protein RbsR and a periplasmic component RbsB of HAT , which is encoded by the operon rbsDABCK under the repression by RbsR .
Similarly , at the melAB promoter , activation by CRP appears to be dependent on direct protein ± protein interactions with MelR .
Research Article J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2003 ; 6 : 41 – 56 DOI : 10.1159 / 000073407 Dual Control by Regulators , GntH and GntR , of the GntII Genes for Gluconate Metabolism in Escherichia coli Ryouichi Tsunedomi Hanae Izu Takuya Kawai Mamoru Yamada Department of Biological Chemistry , Faculty of Agriculture , Yamaguchi University , Yamaguchi , Japan Key Words Gluconate metabolism W Gntll W gntR W gntH W Divergent promoter W Expressional regulation Abstract Escherichia coli possesses two systems , GntI and GntII , for gluconate uptake and catabolism , whose genes are regulated by GntR as a repressor and GntH as an activator , respectively .
Thus , TB201 is a derivative of TB20 in which the DNA site for CRP located between MelR site 1 Other determinants for MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter To investigate the effects of altering the spacing between MelR - binding site R and the upstream sites , derivatives of the TB22 fragment with 5 - or 10 - bp deletions , or with 5 - , 41 - or 91 - bp insertions were constructed ( see Figure 6A and Materials and methods section ) .
Thus , it is likely that E . coli is protecting itself by the Rob - mediated upregulation of AcrAB against the harmful effects of bile salts and fatty acids in the intestinal tract .
The results , summarized as follows , show that mar can be activated in vivo via either MarA or SoxS acting on the marbox promoter region .
Thus , the dmsA promoter exhibits a preference for - 41.5 target sites like other Fnr - regulated class II promoters [ 16 ] .
Taking these results together with those presented above , it is concluded that the cooperative interaction of NagC bound to O NC1 and O NC2 , with IHF bound to the site identified in this work , forms a nucleoprotein complex that activates fimB expression .
Using in vitro assays and mutagenesis of promoter fusions in whole cells , we identified the cis regulatory element involved in MarA upregulation of the oxygeninsensitive nitroreductase nfnB gene .
Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
The transcription of the marA gene is regulated by the repressor MarR ( Alekshun and Levy , 1997 ) .
In relation to pacsP1 , the DNA site for Fis is centred at position – 61 , and its distal nature suggests that pacsP1 repression operates via a different mechanism .
The active ( oxidized or nitrosylated ) form of SoxR activates transcription of the soxS gene up to 100 - fold .
This loop helps prevent AraC protein from entering its inducing state and helps hold the uninduced , or basal level , of expression of the araBAD genes at a low level .
Two gels were prepared , with identical culture samples on each gel , and each blot was probed with the primary antibody corresponding to the purified protein samples loaded , as indicated to the right . - S , anti - RhaS antibody ; - R , anti - RhaR antibody . allow CRP to contribute to rhaBAD activation .
These results argue that different conformational states of MelR are responsible for activation of the melAB promoter and repression of the melR promoter .
Also , DnaA protein functions as a transcriptional repressor for the expression of other genes including rpoH ( 18 ) , mioC ( 19 ) , the guaBA operon ( 20 ) , and uvrB ( 21 ) , while the expression of the nrd gene appeared to be enhanced by DnaA protein ( 22 ) .
Role of - CTD in rhaSR activation .
References Belyaeva , T . , Wade , J . , Webster , C . , Howard , V . , Thomas , M . , Hyde , E . , et al . ( 2000 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
This suggests that Fnr and NarP may act synergistically to activate napF operon expression .
As the NarL / NarP binding site at pnir overlaps with the IHF I site ( Fig . 3 ) , NarL / NarP might compete with IHF , and this would provide a simple mechanism by which NarL / NarP could counteract IHFmediated repression .
Since it is likely that MelR - MelR interactions are important for both activation of pmelAB and repression of pmelR , we suppose that that differences recorded in Table 5 are due to differences in these interactions .
In this study we confirmed the location of the Fnr - binding site at position 64.5 and supported the idea that the mechanism of Fnr - dependent activation of napF expression is distinct from that of promoters with the Fnr - binding site at position 41.5 .
A single base substitution in the left half - site when combined with the Fnr consensus sequence at the right half - site exhibited a 138 - fold activation of dmsA - lacZ expression ( Figure 1 , ?JA450 ) , an induction equivalent to the wild - type dmsA promoter that has the symmetrical deviation in the right half - site ( ca . 114 - fold ) .
We also identified AraC - regulated genes that are transcribed due to read - through of inefficient Rho - independent terminators ( ygeA and polB ) .
( 2004 ) Expression of the chitobiose operon of Escherichia coli is regulated by three transcription factors : NagC , ChbR and CAP .
The need for two specific inducing signals , one for ChbR to activate the expression of the operon and a second for NagC to relieve its repression , ensure that the chb operon is only induced when there is sufficient flux through the combined chb - nag metabolic pathway to activate expression of both the chb and nag operons .
So there is no strong repression of chbB – lacZ by plasmid - encoded NagC .
Thus , overproduction of IciA protein specifically increased transcription from the dnaA promoter 1P .
Transcription of gntT is activated by binding of the cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) - cAMP receptor protein ( CRP ) complex to a CRP binding site positioned at 71 upstream of the gntT transcription start site .
In this study , galT was the only gene repressed by Rob .
In the second part of the present study , we investigated the E . coli ogt promoter , which Constantinidou et al . [ 11 ] had also found to be induced by NarL independently of FNR .
Charles Street Baltimore , MD 21218 , USA * Corresponding author In the absence of arabinose and interactions with other proteins , AraC , the activator - repressor that regulates the araBAD operon in Escherichia coli , was found to prefer participating in DNA looping interactions between the two well - separated DNA half - sites , araI 1 and araO 2 at their normal separation of 211 base - pairs rather than binding to these same two half - sites when they are adjacent to one another .
Since both Lrp and ArgP stimulate argO expression and bind to overlapping targets in the argO control region , we were interested in analysing potential interferences in the action of these transcriptional activators on argO expression , in response to environmental conditions .
In addition to AcrAB , MarA also positively regulates expression of the outer membrane porine TolC which is required for functioning of the AcrAB efflux pump ( Aono et al . , 1998 ; Fralick et al . , 1997 ) .
( 2000 ) Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
The preferential repression by NagC at the looped nagBE – lacZ fusion , compared with the nagE – lacZ fusion with a single operator site , emphasises that regulation by NagC is normally dependent upon DNA loop formation involving the higher - affinity nagB operator .
In summary , the results clearly demonstrate that both operators are required for repression of gntT by GntR .
Fis represses the ogt promoter by displacing upstream - bound NarL To investigate a role of Fis at the ogt promoter , expression of the ogt : : lac fusion was compared in strain JCB387 and in the fis mutant derivative , JCB3871 .
Transcriptional co - activation at the ansB promoters : involvement of the activating regions of CRP and FNR when bound in tandem .
Although these results are consistent with the requirement for CAP and ChbR for chbB activation there is a significant difference between the in vivo and in vitro data .
Furthermore , OmpRphosphate has been shown to negatively regulate the master flagella regulatory complex , flhDC .
Evidence for multiple OmpR - binding sites in the upstream activation sequence of the ompC promoter in Escherichia coli : a single OmpR - binding site is capable of activating the promoter .
On the other hand , activation of the P araB promoter was delayed when glucose was present , consistent with the regulation of this promoter also by CRP ( 6 ) .
RhaR residues D276 , E284 , and D285 are important for rhaSR transcription activation .
Likewise , GalR - mediated repression of the gal operon P1 promoter ( in the absence of galactose ) is postulated to occur by a mechanism involving trapped RNAP in a complex that is an intermediate between the closed and the open complexes ( Choy et al . 1995 ) .
In the case of argO , ArgP mediates its transcriptional activation by Arg , as well as its repression by Lys ( 7 , 26 , 32 , 37 ) ; the latter is achieved by a mechanism involving the active trapping at the argO promoter by ArgP of RNA polymerase , which is then prevented from being released to engage in productive transcription ( 26 ) .
In contrast , and in full agreement with the previous results of Wade et al . ( 17 ) , the longer deletion in the TB23 fragment , that removes MelR binding site 2 , results in a sharp reduction in the repression of the melR promoter by MelR .
The fact that most Fnrdependent promoters have the latter architecture may be due to the fact that many of them are also activated by the NarL protein ( e . g . , the narG , fdnG , nrfA , and nirB promoters ) .
Expression of the chb operon is repressed by NagC , which regulates genes involved in amino sugar metabolism .
Some operons such as malEFG are under the transcriptional activation by the response regulators in Group 1 as well as by CRP , suggesting that they can be transcribed in response to the sensing of respective sugars regardless of the absence or presence of cAMP - CRP .
These binding sites are located upstream of the Fnr - binding site in the control regions of the NarL - activated narG , fdnG and narK operons .
AraC - dependent transcription regulation has been most studied at the araBAD and araC genes , which are expressed from divergent promoters , paraBAD and paraC , whose transcription start sites are separated by 166 bp .
MelRdependent activation of the melAB promoter requires the binding of MelR subunits to four 18 bp sites and the binding of a single CRP dimer to a low - affinity target sequence ( Belyaeva et al . , 2000 ; Wade et al . , 2001 ; see Fig . 1A ) .
In addition to the specific regulator , transcription from certain promoters regulated by members of this family requires other proteins for maximal activity ( e . g . , the CRP in the P rhaBAD promoter ) , or histone - like proteins that act as negative regulators ( e . g . , YomA in the VirF - regulated P yop promoters ) ( 52 , 124 , 242 ) .
( 2000 ) Repression of the Escherichia coli melR promoter by MelR : evidence that full repression requires the formation of a repression loop .
The same concentration and batch of MarA protein , on the other hand , repressed both purA and hdeA ( Fig . 2 ) .
These results show that the NarP protein activates F ( aeg - 46.5 - lacZ ) expression in response to nitrate and nitrite and that the NarL protein antagonizes this activation .
We previously suggested that a MelR dimer simultaneously occupies site R and site 2 , creating a repression loop and the effects of different insertions and deletions on MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter ( Figure 6 ) are consistent with this ( 17 ) .
When reactions were carried out in the presence of RNAP alone as compared with 200 nM purified His 6 - MarA , we detected MarA upregulation of nfnB transcription ( Fig . 4 ) .
In contrast , in all three known examples of MarA - repressed genes ( hdeA , purA , and rob ) , the marbox is in the backward orientation and is proximal to or overlapping the RNAP - binding site ( see Fig . 8 ) .
In the case of the ytfE promoter , repression by NsrR is the dominant regulatory mechanism , though there is also some evidence for anaerobic repression by FNR , as reported previously ( 25 ) .
Our aim in this work was to ascertain if such a simple model applied to MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter .
( 2000 ) FNR dependent activation of the class II dmsA and narG promoters of Escherichia coli requires FNR - activating regions 1 and 3 .
The results described above also suggest that when O NR is placed closer to the fimB promoter , NanR is better able to activate fimB expression , and further work supports this idea .
Summary In vivo and in vitro analyses indicate that transcription of the argO gene coding for an arginine exporter is regulated by the global transcriptional regulator Lrp , an effect that went by unnoticed in previous genome - scale screenings of the Lrp regulatory network in Escherichia coli .
In order to simplify our analysis , we exploited an engineered derivative of the melAB promoter in which MelR binding to site 2 and site 2 ¢ , in the absence of CRP , is sufficient for transcription activation .
AraC - dependent transcription initiation at the araBAD promoter is increased by CRP , which binds to a single DNA site upstream of I1 and I2 ( 11 ) .
Effect of excess ChbR and NagC on repression of the chbB – lacZ fusion . wild type nagC chbR pTZ ( NagC ) 48 ± 6 47 ± 3 83 ± 4 pTZ ( Mlc ) 42 ± 4 62 ± 3 56 ± 4 pTZ ( ChbR ) 2.3 ± 0.2 32 ± 2 2.8 ± 0.5 pTZ control .
Two regions of enhanced XylR binding in the presence of xylose were revealed in the xylAB / xylFGH intergenic space by DMS footprinting [ 4 ] .
Molecular Microbiology ( 2000 ) 36 ( 1 ) , 211 ± 222 Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein Tamara A .
Combined , the effector modulated activation of argO transcription by ArgP and Lrp must ensure an adapted and fine - tuned synthesis of the transporter in response to environmental conditions .
Only the CAP - proximal AraC site , araFGH1 , is required for normal activation of p FGH , and all upstream DNA can be deleted without significant effect .
According to previous results ( 16 ) , IciA protein was able to activate in vitro transcription from dnaA promoter 1P in the presence of limiting amounts of RNA polymerase .
Figure 10 illustrates the likely organization of MelR subunits during transcription activation at the melAB pro - © 2003 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 48 , 335 – 348MelR binding at the E . coli melAB promoter 345 Fig . 10 .
These genes , together with xylAB , are positively regulated by the same protein ( XylR [ Fig . 4 ] ) , which appears to recognize the consensus sequences located in their promoterVOL .
Thus , antagonization of NarP - independent activation of aeg - 46.5 operon expression by the NarL protein should be more pronounced in the presence of nitrate than nitrate .
Previous results reported by Bhende and Egan ( 4 ) identified two amino acid residues in 70 , K593 and R599 , that were important for RhaSmediated transcription activation at rhaBAD and rhaT .
These results establish the unconventional napF operon control region architecture , in which the major promoter P1 is activated by the Fnr protein bound to a site centered at 64.5 with respect to the transcription initiation site , working in conjunction with the phospho - NarP protein bound to a site centered at 44.5 .
The AraC protein activates and represses the araBAD genes , depending upon the presence of the inducer and cAMP / CAP which change the occupancy of the different sites ( Reeder and Schleif , 1993 and references therein ) .
RhaS activates transcription from rhaBAD , and transcription from the rhaS gene is controlled by RhaR ( 63 , 244 ) .
The experiments in Fig . 2a – c suggest that the binding of Rob to the robboxes of the fumC , micF , and inaA promoters occludes the binding of 70 R4 to the 35 hexamer of these class II promoters , as is also the case during SoxS - dependent activation of the fumC and micF promoters .
Additional activation of the marRAB operon is achieved by the binding of Fis to a site just upstream of the marbox at bp - 92 to - 73 ( Martin and Rosner , 1997 ) .
This suggested that the hyb operon is subject to catabolite repression mediated by the cAMP - CRP system ( Busby &amp; Kolb , 1996 ) .
We have identi ® ed residues within activating region 1 ( AR1 ) of CRP that are important in transcription activation of the melAB promoter .
We demonstrate in this paper that the mechanism of stimulation of transcription by IciA protein may include : ( i ) the binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the IciA I site , which is located – 50 to – 63 from the transcription start site of dnaA promoter 1P ; and ( ii ) the stimulation of RNA polymerase binding to the promoter by two IciA protein dimers on the IciA I site .
( 2001 ) Transcriptional regulation in the Escherichia coli melibiose operon : interations of MelR and CRP .
Activities were used to measure MelR - dependent activation of pmelAB and MelR - dependent repression of pmelR .
Since gluconate is an intermediate of the L - idonate pathway , there must be cross talk with the GntR regulon which leads to induction of the ED pathway .
To evaluate the role of the two MarR binding sites in the repression of marRAB operon transcription ( Fig . 1A ; Cohen et al . , 1993a ; Martin and Rosner , 1995 ) , fusions of the marRAB regulatory region to lacZ were constructed and integrated in the chromosome as single - copy ?RS45 lysogens ( Simons et al . , 1987 ) .
In contrast , IHF does not enhance the ability of NanR to activate fimB expression in the wild - type background .
A common phenotype associated with transcriptional activation of micF by Rob , SoxS and MarA is multiple antibiotic resistance .
The model proposed by Celis ( 11 , 12 ) to explain the Can r phenotype of an argP d mutant assumed ( i ) that the mutation represents a loss - of - function ( that is , dominant - negative ) allele of argP and ( ii ) that wild - type ArgP is a transcriptional activator of argK , whose product in turn acts to enhance Arg uptake through two different transport systems .
HrpXv , and AraC - type regulator , activates expression of five of the six loci in the hrp cluster of Xanthomonas campestris pv . vesicatoria .
marA locus causes decreased expression of OmpF porin in multiple - antibiotic - resistant ( Mar ) mutants of Escherichia coli .
Since our findings indicated that ArgP is needed for activation of lysP transcription , we tested whether cadBA expression would be rendered Lys independent even in the argP mutant .
Model for transcription activation at the melAB promoter . In the absence of melibiose , MelR subunits ( M ) occupy Site 1 0 , Site 1 and Site 2 and the CRP dimer is recruited to the DNA between Site 1 and Site 2 .
Recent genetic data show that Rob represses transcription of the galT gene ( M . H . J . B . and B . D . , unpublished results ) .
Our previous experiments have shown that when both dnaA promoters 1P and 2P were repressed by DnaA protein , IciA protein specifically activated transcription from dnaA promoter 1P , while dnaA promoter 2P was still repressed ( 25 ) .
The cooperative binding of Lrp to the argO control region and the footprinting data ( Figs 3 and 4 ) suggest the binding of at least three Lrp dimers to regularly spaced binding sites ( Fig . 1 ) and wrapping of the operator DNA .
Thus , the melR promoter is not efficiently repressed by MelR , and MelR is over - expressed .
Deletion of all of the metJ coding region and half of the intercistronic region ( pKmJAHN ) lowered the galK expression , but the remaining activity was ' still subject to repression by chromosomal metJ .
We conclude that RhaR positively regulates transcription from the promoters pl , p2 and p3 , and that RhaS may regulate p1 and p3 weakly .
MalI , a novel protein involved in regulation of the maltose system of Escherichia coli , is highly homologous to the repressor proteins GalR , CytR , and LacI .
The enhanced ability of Fnr to activate dmsABC gene expression is possibly , by analogy to Crp , due to increased affinity of Fnr at the consensus versus the native non - consensus Fnr recognition sequence at dmsA .
NagC repression is critical in maintaining chiP mRNA levels low enough , relative to ChiX , to allow full silencing by this sRNA .
In order to investigate further the role of residues in and around AR1 in transcription activation at the melAB promoter , we puri ® ed CRP carrying the TI158 substitution that improves CRP - dependent activation of the melAB promoter in vivo .
Epst , ream repredsion and CRP stimulation of the Escherichia coli r , - arabinose operon .
This stimulates us to examine the possibility that GntR is also involved in the expressional regulation of the GntII genes .
IciA protein binds to two sites in the dnaA promoter region .
One gene , galT , was repressed by Rob .
Hwang we have shown that IciA protein activates transcription from the promoter 1P of the dnaA gene .
Recently , we have uncovered a unique regulation that the activator of GntII genes , GntH , exerts negative control of GntI genes [ Tsunedomi et al . , 2003 ] .
The figure also shows the measured amount of MelR - dependent repression of the melR promoter on the KK81 fragment carrying the different Site R substitutions .
In addition to the increase in fur expression , superoxide stress resulted in the down - regulation of sodB , a Fur - activated gene ( 13 ) .
Both Fis and IHF repress in vivo expression from pacsP1 , but have smaller repressive effects on expression from pnrfA .
The horizontal shaded boxes denote 22 bp DNA sites for CRP : one site centred at position 2195.5 is responsible for the activation of the melR promoter , while the other , centred at position 281.5 , is discussed in this paper .
For example , with AraC at the araBAD promoter , a combination of genetics and biochemistry has shown that the binding orientation is such that the C - terminally located HTH motif is adjacent to the promoter - 35 element ( Niland et al . , 1996 ) , and that , during activation , AraC binds to two adjacent sites as a direct repeat ( Reeder and Schleif , 1993 ) .
The experiment illustrated in Figure 2 shows that MelR has little or no effect on the synthesis of RNA - 1 but represses synthesis of the transcript from the melR promoter .
acrZ is regulated by MarA , Rob , and SoxS .
However , the situation is not so simple , and , in the absence of melibiose , efficient repression requires DNA sequences upstream of the melR promoter ; in particular , MelRbinding Site 2 is required .
NagC is required for full repression of the chbB operon and it serves to limit induction when the supply of chitobiose is low .
NarL - phosphate must bind to multiple upstream sites to activate transcription from the narG promoter of Escherichia coli .
Summary Expression of the narK gene of Escherichia coli , like the narGHJI operon , is positively regulated by two frans - acting factors : Fnr , which is activated by anaerobic conditions , and NarL , which is activated by the presence of nitrate .
Results ArgP - mediated regulation of E . coli argO Reconstitution of ArgP - mediated regulation of argO transcription in vitro Toward reconstitution of argO transcriptional regulation in vitro , the in vivo start site of argO transcription was first mapped ( in an argP d strain where such transcription is high and constitutive ) by primer extension analysis to an A residue situated 28 bases upstream of the predicted translation start site of the structural gene ( see Supplementary Fig . S1 ) .
The expression of xylF is negatively regulated by Fis and RpoS at the transcriptional level ( 50 ) , and a putative regulator , xylR , was found downstream of xylFGH .
It is unlikely that CRP binding to site 4 contributes directly to an increase in rhaSR expression , since transcription activation by CRP requires that its binding site be on the same face of the DNA as the promoter ( 6 ) .
RhaS activates transcription of the rhaBAD and rhaT operons by binding as a dimer to sites that overlap the 35 hexamers of the promoters by 4 bp and extend upstream to 81 and 82 , respectively ( see Fig . 1 for the rhaBAD promoter ) ( 10 , 45 ) .
Binding of Fis and IHF to sites centred at positions - 15 and - 54 , respectively , represses FNR - dependent transcription at the nrf promoter .
Note that in a control experiment , the activity of the MBP - NarL protein was confirmed by its ability to activate transcription of the NarL - dependent fdnG promoter in vitro ( data not shown ) .
Mutations in the tolC locus show increased expression of micF and a concomitant decrease in OmpF .
This and the finding that expression of gntV - lacZ fusion was relatively high even in the absence of cAMP ( table 4 ) may suggest that binding of GntR to all 3 sites slightly activates gntV expression .
Optimal repression requires MelR binding to a site that overlaps the melR transcription start point and to upstream sites .
gntR gene ( Fig . 4A ) , suggesting that the promoters are However , no such reduction of bGal activity by GntR negatively regulated by GntR .
The DNA loop model for ara repression : AraC protein occupies the proposed loop sites in vivo and repression - negative mutations lie in these same sites .
The repression of purA by MarA was quantitatively similar in vivo and in vitro , whereas that of hdeA was greater in vivo ( ~ 6 – 25 - fold ) than in vitro ( ~ 1.7 - fold ) .
Based on data from in vitro studies , Celis suggested that wild - type ArgP both represses its own transcription and activates that of argK ; he also sought to explain the Can r phenotype associated with the argP d mutation on the assumption that it is a loss - of - function ( that is , dominant - negative ) allele whose product is unable to efficiently activate the genes involved in Arg uptake , including argK ( 12 ) .
With a tri - alanine scanning library of amino acid residues of 70 from positions 531 – 590 ( residues 531 – 540 lie in the distal portion of 70 R3 . 2 , residues 541 – 570 lie in 70 R4 . 1 , and residues 571 – 590 lie in the N - terminal portion of 70 R4 . 2 ) , 1,46,47 we recently determined that none of the amino acid residues within this region are required for SoxS - dependent activation of transcription from class II promoters fumC and micF , including some substitutions that replace amino acids that are known to interact with nucleotides of the 35 hexamer .
To explore the possible mechanisms involved in the integrated transcriptional activation by Fnr and NarL we have extended our studies to the c / s - acting regions required for expression of the narKgene , which encodes another component involved in nitrate respiration , a nitrate - nitrite antiporter ( Noji et ai , 1989 ; DeMoss and Hsu , 1991 ) .
Transcription activation at the Escherichia coli melAB promoter : the role of MelR and the cyclic AMP receptor protein .
( ii ) Mutations within residues in this region in AraC ( Cys204 3 Tyr , Ser208 3 Ala , Arg210 3 Cys , and His212 3 Tyr or Ala ) reduced binding to and decreased transcriptional activation from the P araBAD promoter ( 26 – 28 , 39 , 78 ) .
The transcriptional fusions ( Fig . 2 ) in the als operon were Lac in their original background but became repressed when AlsR was supplied from a plasmid , implying that the AlsR is a negative regulator for the als operon ( data not shown ) .
In a second set of experiments , we used the in vitro transcription assay to investigate whether CRP affected activation at the melAB promoter .
Lrp - dependent regulation of lysP and cadBA .
Here we report that most of the changes we studied had but small effects on MelR - dependent activation of pmelAB .
The AraC protein , which regulates the L - arabinose operons in E . coli , consists of two domains that function in chimeric proteins .
In subsequent work ( Williams et al . , 1994 ) , we were able to prove that MelR binding to both these sites ( called Site 1 and Site 2 ; see Fig . 1A ) is necessary for melibiose - dependent activation of the melAB promoter in vivo .
CsrA appears not to affect eda transcript stability but appears to activate eda , since eda transcription was 1.6 - to 1.8 - fold lower in a csrA background .
Two other regulators , OmpR and CpxR , activate nanC expression , although a direct control has not been proven .
The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the dnaA promoter 1P element enhances the binding of RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoter 1P .
Curiously , Barbosa and Levy ( Barbosa and Levy 2000 ) found elevated gatA and gatC transcription due to MarA expression , and Pomposiello and colleagues ( Pomposiello et al . , 2001 ) found elevated gatA , gatB and gatD upon treating cells with paraquat , and elevated gatZ , gatA , gatB , gatC and gatD upon treating cells with salicylate .
Three potential Lrp binding sites can be found in the argO control region ( Pot - box 1 , 2 and 3 ; Fig . 1 ) .
It is interesting to note that the three central operators , galOE2 , OE3 and OE4 , which have higher affinity for GalS than GalR , all have A / T at positions 8 of the operators ( Fig . 1B ) which is also the case for the mglB and galS operators ( Weickert and Adhya , 1993a , b ) which are preferentially regulated by GalS .
The physiological significance of the repression of purA and hdeA by MarA is not known .
This scenario is plausible , because ArgP and Lrp competitively activate argO ( 35 ) .
mdaA ( also known as nfsA ) but not ybjC had previously been shown to be regulated by SoxS although no binding site had been identified ( Liochev et al . , 1999 ) .
We have found that the amount of AcrA expressed from the chromosomal acrAB operon was elevated in OST3408 , OST3410 , OST3408T , JA300R , and JA300 , each carrying marA , robA , and soxS ( Fig . 3 ) .
Integration of three signals at the Escherichia coli nrf promoter : a role for Fis protein in catabolite repression .
Expression of both nagE and nagB was shown to be stimulated by CAP in viva , although nagE was much more dependent than nagB ( Plumbridge , 1990 ) .
The ybjC gene was also activated by expression of SoxS in our experiments ( Table 1 ) .
In a gntR deletion mutant , the expression of a chromosomal gntT : : lacZ fusion is both high and constitutive , confirming that GntR is the negative regulator of gntT .
25 , No . 17 © 1997 Oxford University Press The binding of two dimers of IciA protein to the dnaA promoter 1P element enhances the binding of RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoter 1P Yong Lee 1,2 , Ho Lee 1,2 , Jeongbin Yim 1,2 and Deog Hwang 1 , * 1 The Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics , 2 Department of Microbiology , Seoul National University , Seoul 151 - 742 , Korea Received May 6 , 1997 ; Revised and Accepted July 11 , 1997 ABSTRACT Transcription of the dnaA gene from the promoter 1P has been shown to be activated in vitro and in vivo by the binding of IciA protein to two sites on the dnaA promoter region [ Lee , Y . S . , Kim , H . , and Hwang , D . S . ( 1996 ) Mol . Microbiol . 19 , 389 – 396 ; Lee , Y . S . , and Hwang , D . S . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 83 – 88 ] .
